





1st Session, 37th Parliament,
49-50-51 Elizabeth II, 2001-2002 










House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-475









An Act to amend the Canada Pension Plan







R.S., c. C-8


Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









1. (1) The definition ``orphan'' in 
subsection 42(1) of the Canada Pension Plan 
is repealed.










(2) The definition ``survivor'' in 
subsection 42(1) of the Act is amended by 
striking out the word ``or'' at the end of 
paragraph (a), by adding the word ``or'' at 
the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (b):










(c) a dependent child of the contributor;  









2. (1) Paragraph 44(1)(d) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










(d) subject to subsection (1.1), a survivor's 
pension shall be paid to the survivor of a 
deceased contributor who has made 
contributions for not less than the minimum 
qualifying period;









(2) Paragraph 44(1)(f) of the Act is 
repealed.










3. The heading before section 59 of the 
Act is replaced by the following:










Disabled Contributor's Child's Benefit










4. The portion of section 59 of the Act 
before paragraph (a) is replaced by the 
following:







Amount of 
benefit


59. A disabled contributor's child's benefit 
payable to the child of a disabled contributor 
is a basic monthly amount consisting of










5. Subsections 60(3) to (5) of the Act are 
replaced by the following:







Exception


(3) Where a disabled contributor's child's 
benefit would, if the application had been 
approved, have been payable to a child of a 
disabled contributor on application made 
prior to the death of the child and the child dies 
after December 31, 1977, not having reached 
eighteen years of age, and no application has 
been made at the time of the death of the child, 
an application may be made within one year 
after the death by the person or agency having 
custody and control of the child at the time of 
the death or, where there is at that time no 
person or agency having custody and control, 
by such person or agency as the Minister may 
direct.







Benefits 
payable to 
estate or other 
persons


(4) Where an application is made pursuant 
to subsection (2) or (3), a benefit that would 
have been payable to a deceased person 
referred to in subsection (2) or a deceased 
child referred to in subsection (3) shall be paid 
to the estate or such person as may be 
prescribed by regulation.







Application 
deemed to 
have been 
received on 
date of death


(5) Any application made pursuant to 
subsection (2) or (3) is deemed to have been 
received










(a) on the date of the death of a person who, 
prior to his death, would have been entitled, 
on approval of an application, to payment of 
a benefit under this Act; or









(b) on the date of the death of a child 
referred to in subsection (3) where the 
person having custody and control of the 
child did not make an application prior to 
the death of the child.









6. The heading before section 74 of the 
Act is replaced by the following:










Disabled Contributor's Child's Benefit










7. Subsections 74(1) to (3) of the Act are 
replaced by the following:







Persons by 
whom 
application 
may be made


74. (1) An application for a disabled 
contributor's child's benefit may be made on 
behalf of a disabled contributor's child by the 
child or by any other person or agency to 
whom the benefit would, if the application 
were approved, be payable under this Part.







Commenceme
nt of payment 
of benefit


(2) Subject to section 62, where payment of 
a disabled contributor's child's benefit in 
respect of a contributor is approved, the 
benefit is payable for each month 
commencing with the later of










(a) the month commencing with which a 
disability pension is payable to the 
contributor under this Act or under a 
provincial pension plan, and









(b) the month next following the month in 
which the child was born or otherwise 
became a child of the contributor,









but in no case earlier than the twelfth month 
preceding the month following the month in 
which the application was received.







No benefit in 
respect of 
more than two 
contributors


(3) Where a disabled contributor's child's 
benefit has become payable to a child under 
this Act or under a provincial pension plan in 
respect of any contributor thereunder, no 
disabled contributor's child's benefit is 
payable to the child under this Act in respect 
of any other such contributor except another 
parent of the child, and in no case shall such 
a benefit be paid to the child in respect of more 
than two contributors.










8. Section 75 of the Act is replaced by the 
following:







Payment of 
benefit


75. Where a disabled contributor's child's 
benefit is payable to a child of a disabled 
contributor, payment thereof shall, if the child 
has not reached eighteen years of age, be made 
to the person or agency having custody and 
control of the child, or, where there is no 
person or agency having custody and control 
of the child, to such person or agency as the 
Minister may direct, and for the purposes of 
this Part, the contributor, except where the 
child is living apart from the contributor, shall 
be presumed, in the absence of any evidence 
to the contrary, to be the person having 
custody and control of the child.










9. Subsections 76(2) and (3) of the Act are 
replaced by the following:







Exception


(3) Where, by reason of the death of a 
contributor, a disabled contributor's child's 
benefit ceases to be payable to a person who 
is 18 years of age or older at the time of that 
death, an application under section 60 for a 
survivor's pension  shall be deemed to have 
been made by that person in the month in 
which the contributor died.








