





2nd Session, 36th Parliament,
48 Elizabeth II, 1999










The House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-382









An Act to establish national standards across 
Canada for education provided by the 
provinces







Preamble


 Whereas it is recognized that Canadians 
can achieve higher education standards and 
establish improved education systems 
throughout the country;










 Whereas an improved education will 
improve the quality of life for Canadians and 
also make them more competitive in the world 
in the future;










 Whereas continued access to quality 
education without financial or other barriers 
will be critical in maintaining and improving 
the education standards of Canadians;










 Whereas improvement in education in 
Canada in the future can only be achieved 
through cooperative partnerships of 
governments, education professionals, 
industry, labour, parents, youth, voluntary 
organizations and individual Canadians;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada has the 
objective of establishing national goals so that 
Canada will remain internationally 
competitive, such standards to include school 
attendance, performance standards and 
achievement, career-oriented elements in 
curricula, teacher development and adult 
literacy;










 And Whereas legislative jurisdiction over 
education rests with the provinces, and this 
Act is not intended to abrogate or derogate 
from or in any way impair that jurisdiction, but 
to provide a catalyst for interprovincial 
cooperation to achieve the goals established in 
this Act;










Now, Therefore, Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate and House of 
Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:










 






Short title


1. This Act may be cited as the Education 
Standards Act.







Definitions


2. The definitions in this section apply in 
this Act.







``Canadian''
« Canadien »


``Canadian'' means a citizen or resident of 
Canada.







``Minister''
« ministre »


``Minister'' means the Minister of Industry.







Canadian 
education 
policy


3. It is hereby established that the primary 
objective of Canadian education standards 
policy is to protect, promote and improve the 
quality of education for Canadians and to 
facilitate reasonable access to education 
without financial or other barriers.







Purpose of 
Act


4. The purpose of this Act is to establish 
national standards for education through a 
consultative process among governments, 
education professionals, industry, labour, 
parents, youth, voluntary organizations and 
individual Canadians representing all sectors 
of the population.







National 
standards for 
education


5. The national standards for education in 
Canada shall include, but not be limited to, the 
following:










(a) every person who is required to attend 
school or complete an apprenticeship 
program should be required by law to 
remain at a school or in the program until 
reaching a standard age or completing a 
requisite number of years in the program;









(b) there should be incentives to motivate 
students to complete their education;









(c) there should be improved standards in 
the core subjects of mathematics, grammar 
and the sciences;









(d) curricula should include appropriate 
elements, specifically oriented toward 
skills needed in employment, that will 
prepare students for entry into the work 
force;









(e) there should be a national strategy for 
the training, recruitment and retention of 
well-qualified and motivated teachers at all 
levels of education;









(f) educators should have regular 
professional development programs 
available to them to keep them informed on 
new training methods and technology and 
new developments in the subjects they 
teach;









(g) there should be closer links between the 
different elements of the education system, 
and industry and other employers;









(h) there should be national standards for 
assessing, screening and evaluating 
students across Canada;









(i) there should be an improved system to 
facilitate transfer of credits for students 
who move within Canada;









(j) there should be reasonable support 
across Canada to enable disadvantaged 
young Canadians to complete their 
education to a level that will enable them to 
join all Canadians in obtaining employment 
that is reasonably commensurate with their 
ambitions and abilities; and









(k) there should be reasonable opportunities 
for adult Canadians who are no longer in an 
education program to achieve functional 
literacy in at least one of the official 
languages of Canada.






Implemen-
tation of 
consultative 
process


6. (1) The Minister shall










(a) promote and encourage the institution of 
the standards referred to in section 5 across 
Canada; and









(b) advise the heads of departments, boards 
and agencies of the Government of Canada 
and of the corporations named in Schedule 
III to the Financial Administration Act that 
may be involved in the education, training 
and professional development of teachers 
of initiatives they may take and cooperation 
they may offer to facilitate the achievement 
of the standards referred to in section 5.






Planning 
conference


(2) The Minister may convene a conference 
of the ministers and department heads 
responsible for education and advanced 
education in each of the provinces and 
territories to plan the initiation of the 
consultative process referred to in section 4.







Agreements


(3) The Minister may, with the approval of 
the Governor in Council, enter into 
agreements with any government of any 
province or any agency thereof, or with any 
other person respecting the achievement of 
the objectives of this Act.







Report to 
Parliament


7. The Minister shall, no later than July 1 
next following the commencement of this Act 
and no later than every July 1 and January 1 
thereafter, prepare and lay before Parliament 
a report on the activities undertaken pursuant 
to this Act, the results achieved and the 
ministers' recommendations for further action 
to achieve the purpose of this Act.







Coming into 
force


8. This Act comes into force on a day to be 
fixed by order of the Governor in Council.








