






1nd Session, 35th Parliament,
42-43-44 Elizabeth II, 1994-95










The House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-310









An Act to provide resumption of operations of 
Archer Daniel Midland Ltd.










Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









SHORT TITLE









1. This Act may be cited as the ADM 
Agri-Industries Ltd. Operations Act.










INTERPRETATION









2. (1) In this Act,










``arbitrator'' means the arbitrator appointed 
pursuant to subsection 3(1);










``collective agreement'' means the collective 
agreement between the employer and the 
union that expired on January 31, 1992;










``employee'' means a person employed by the 
employer who is bound by the collective 
agreement which expired on January 31, 
1992;










``employer'' means ADM Agri-Industries 
Ltd.;










``Minister'' means Minister within the 
meaning of the Canada Labour Code;










``union'' means the National Syndicate of 
Employees of Ogilvie Flour Mills Co. Ltd.










(2) Unless otherwise provided, words and 
expressions used in this Act have the same 
meaning as in Part 1 of the Canada Labour 
Code.










ARBITRATION









3. (1) The Minister shall appoint an 
arbitrator and refer to the arbitrator all matters 
relating to the amendment or revision of the 
collective agreement that, at the time of the 
appointment, are in dispute between the 
employer and the union.










(2) Within thirty days after being appointed, 
or within such greater period as may be 
specified by the Minister, the arbitrator shall










(a) determine the matters on which the 
employer and union are in substantial 
agreement on the coming into force of the 
Act, on which they subsequently agree and 
incorporate into the collective agreement 
the contractual language on which they are 
substantially agreed or, if there is no such 
language, such contractual language as the 
arbitrator considers appropriate;









(b) arbitrate all matters not covered by 
paragraph (a) and render a decision in 
respect thereof in such form as will enable 
the decision to be incorporated into the 
collective agreement; and









(c) report to the Minister on the resolution 
of the matters referred to the arbitrator.









(3) (a) The arbitrator shall determine a 
back-to-work protocol including, but not 
limited to, matters such as the process of recall 
of employees; and










(b) any dispute arising out of the 
back-to-work protocol shall be submitted to 
the arbitrator for final and binding 
resolution.









(4) The arbitrator has, with such 
modifications as the circumstances require, 
all the powers and duties of an arbitrator 
pursuant to sections 60 and 61 of the Canada 
Labour Code.










4. (1) The terms and conditions of the 
collective agreement, as amended or revised 
by the report of the arbitrator submitted to the 
Minister pursuant to section 3, are effective 
and binding on the employer and the union 
from the day on which the report is submitted 
to the Minister until such date as determined 
by the arbitrator.










(2) The arbitrator may provide that any term 
or condition of the collective agreement is 
effective and binding on a day before or after 
the day on which the report amending or 
revising the collective agreement is submitted 
to the Minister.










(3) Part 1 of the Canada Labour Code 
applies in respect of the collective agreement 
as amended or revised by the arbitrator as if it 
has been entered into pursuant to that Part.










5. (a) Once the arbitrator has reported to the 
Minister, the employer shall forthwith resume 
or continue operations in accordance with the 
terms of the collective agreement as amended 
or revised by the arbitrator and the 
back-to-work-protocol; and










(b) every employee, as determined by the 
arbitrator pursuant to section 3, shall, when 
required to do so, return to work forthwith 
in accordance with the terms of the 
back-to-work protocol.









OBLIGATIONS









6. Neither the employer nor any officer or 
representative of the employer shall










(a) in any manner impede any employee 
from complying with paragraph 5(b);









(b) discharge or in any other manner 
discipline, or authorize or direct the 
discharge or discipline of, any employee by 
reason of that employee's having been on 
strike before the coming into force of this 
Act.









7. The union and each officer and 
representatives of the union shall










(a) forthwith once the arbitrator has 
reported to the Minister, give notice to the 
employees that, by reason of that reporting, 
the operations at the ADM Agri-Industries 
Ltd., Montreal, Quebec are to be resumed 
and that the employees, when required to do 
so, are forthwith to resume the duties of 
their employment;









(b) take all reasonable steps to ensure that 
employees comply with paragraph 5(b);









(c) refrain from any conduct that may 
encourage employees not to comply with 
paragraph 5(b).









8. All costs incurred by Her Majesty in right 
of Canada relating to the appointment of the 
arbitrator and the exercise of the arbitrator's 
duties under this Act are debts due to Her 
Majesty in right of Canada and may be 
recovered as such, in equal parts, from the 
employer and the union in any court of 
competent jurisdiction.










AMENDMENT TO THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT









9. Nothing in this Act shall be construed so 
as to limit or restrict the rights of the parties to 
the collective agreement to agree to amend 
any provision of the agreement as amended by 
or pursuant to this Act and to give effect 
thereto.










ENFORCEMENT









10. (1) An individual who contravenes any 
provision of this Act is guilty of an offence 
punishable on summary conviction and is 
liable, for each day and part of a day during 
which the offence continues, to a fine










(a) of not more than $50,000, where the 
individual was acting in the capacity of an 
officer or representative of the employer or 
the union when the offence was committed; 
or









(b) of not more than $1,000, in any other 
case.









(2) Where the employer or the union 
contravenes any provision of this Act, it is 
guilty of an offence punishable on summary 
conviction and is liable, for each day or part of 
a day during which the offence continues, to 
a fine of not more than $100,000.










11. Notwithstanding subsection 787(2) of 
the Criminal Code, a term of imprisonment 
may not be imposed in default of payment of 
a fine that is imposed under section 10.










12. Where a person is convicted of an 
offence under section 10 and the fine that is 
imposed is not paid when required, the 
prosecutor may, by filing the conviction, enter 
as a judgement the amount of the fine and 
costs, if any, in a superior court of the province 
in which the trial was held, and the judgement 
is enforceable against the person in the same 
manner as if it were a judgement rendered 
against the person in that court in civil 
proceedings.










13. For the purposes of this Act, the 
employer and the union are deemed to be 
persons.










14. For greater certainty, nothing in this Act 
shall be construed so as to restrict a person 
from raising a defence of due diligence in a 
prosecution for an offence under section 10.










COMING INTO FORCE









15. This Act comes into force on the day 
immediately following the day it is assented 
to.








