






42-43-44 ELIZABETH II









CHAPTER 19









An Act to amend the Young Offenders Act and 
the Criminal Code










[Assented to 22th June, 1995] 










Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:






R.S., c. Y-1; 
R.S., c. 27 (1st 
Supp.), c. 24 
(2nd Supp.), 
c. 1 (3rd 
Supp.), c. 1 
(4th Supp.); 
1991, c. 43; 
1992, cc. 1, 
11, 47; 1993, 
cc. 28, 45


YOUNG OFFENDERS ACT









1. (1) Paragraph 3(1)(a) of the Young 
Offenders Act is replaced by the following:










(a) crime prevention is essential to the 
long-term protection of society and requires 
addressing the underlying causes of crime 
by young persons and developing 
multi-disciplinary approaches to 
identifying and effectively responding to 
children and young persons at risk of 
committing offending behaviour in the 
future;









(a.1) while young persons should not in all 
instances be held accountable in the same 
manner or suffer the same consequences for 
their behaviour as adults, young persons 
who commit offences should nonetheless 
bear responsibility for their contraventions;









(2) Subsection 3(1) of the Act is amended 
by adding the following after 
paragraph (c):










(c.1) the protection of society, which is a 
primary objective of the criminal law 
applicable to youth, is best served by 
rehabilitation, wherever possible, of young 
persons who commit offences, and 
rehabilitation is best achieved by 
addressing the needs and circumstances of 
a young person that are relevant to the 
young person's offending behaviour;









2. Subsection 11(3) of the Act is amended 
by striking out the word ``or'' at the end of 
paragraph (c.1), by adding the word ``or'' 
at the end of paragraph (d) and by adding 
the following after paragraph (d):










(e) at a review of the level of custody 
pursuant to subsection 28.1(1),









3. (1) Subsection 12(1) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:







Where young 
person 
appears


12. (1) A young person against whom an 
information is laid must first appear before a 
youth court judge or a justice, and the judge or 
justice shall










(a) cause the information to be read to the 
young person;









(b) where the young person is not 
represented by counsel, inform the young 
person of the right to be so represented; and









(c) where the young person is a young 
person referred to in subsection 16(1.01), 
inform the young person that the young 
person will be proceeded against in 
ordinary court in accordance with the law 
ordinarily applicable to an adult charged 
with the offence unless an application is 
made to the youth court by the young 
person, the young person's counsel or the 
Attorney General or an agent of the 
Attorney General to have the young person 
proceeded against in the youth court and an 
order is made to that effect.









(2) Section 12 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (3):







Idem


(3.1) Where a young person is a young 
person referred to in subsection 16(1.01) and 
is not represented in youth court by counsel, 
the youth court shall satisfy itself that the 
young person understands










(a) the charge against the young person;









(b) the consequences of being proceeded 
against in ordinary court; and









(c) the young person's right to apply to be 
proceeded against in youth court.









(3) Section 12 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (4):







Idem


(5) Where the youth court is not satisfied 
that a young person understands the matters 
referred to in subsection (3.1), the court shall 
direct that the young person be represented by 
counsel.







1991, c. 43, 
para. 35(a)


4. (1) Paragraph 13(1)(b) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










(b) on its own motion or on application of 
the young person or the prosecutor, where









(i) the court has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the young person may be 
suffering from a physical or mental 
illness or disorder, a psychological 
disorder, an emotional disturbance, a 
learning disability or a mental disability,









(ii) the young person's history indicates 
a pattern of repeated findings of guilt 
under this Act, or









(iii) the young person is alleged to have 
committed an offence involving serious 
personal injury,









and the court believes a medical, 
psychological or psychiatric report in 
respect of the young person is necessary for 
a purpose mentioned in paragraphs (2)(a) 
to (f),









(2) Subsection 13(2) of the Act is amended 
by striking out the word ``or'' at the end of 
paragraph (d), by adding the word ``or'' at 
the end of paragraph (e) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (e):










(f) authorizing disclosure under 
subsection 38(1.5).









5. Subsection 13.1(2) of the Act is 
amended by striking out the word ``or'' at 
the end of paragraph (i), by adding the word 
``or'' at the end of paragraph (j) and by 
adding the following after paragraph (j):










(k) deciding an application for a disclosure 
order under subsection 38(1.5).









*ep










6. (1) Paragraph 14(2)(a) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










(a) the results of an interview with









(i) the young person,









(ii) where reasonably possible, the 
parents of the young person and,









(iii) where appropriate and reasonably 
possible, members of the young person's 
extended family;









(2) Subparagraphs 14(2)(c)(v) and (vi) of 
the Act are replaced by the following:










(v) the availability and appropriateness 
of community services and facilities for 
young persons and the willingness of the 
young person to avail himself or herself 
of those services or facilities,









(vi) the relationship between the young 
person and the young person's parents 
and the degree of control and influence of 
the parents over the young person and, 
where appropriate and reasonably 
possible, the relationship between the 
young person and the young person's 
extended family and the degree of 
control and influence of the young 
person's extended family over the young 
person, and









(3) Subsection 14(2) of the Act is amended 
by striking out the word ``and'' at the end of 
paragraph (b), by adding the word ``and'' at 
the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (c):










(d) such information as the provincial 
director considers relevant, including any 
recommendation that the provincial 
director considers appropriate.









7. The heading before section 16 of the 
Act is replaced by the following:










TRANSFER






1992, c. 11, 
s. 2(1)


8. (1) Subsections 16(1) and (1.1) of the 
Act are replaced by the following:







Transfer to 
ordinary court


16. (1) Subject to subsection (1.01), at any 
time after an information is laid against a 
young person alleged to have, after attaining 
the age of fourteen years, committed an 
indictable offence other than an offence 
referred to in section 553 of the Criminal Code 
but prior to adjudication, a youth court shall, 
on application of the young person or the 
young person's counsel or the Attorney 
General or an agent of the Attorney General, 
determine, in accordance with 
subsection (1.1), whether the young person 
should be proceeded against in ordinary court.







Trial in 
ordinary court 
for certain 
offences


(1.01) Every young person against whom an 
information is laid who is alleged to have 
committed










(a) first degree murder or second degree 
murder within the meaning of section 231 
of the Criminal Code,









(b) an offence under section 239 of the 
Criminal Code (attempt to commit 
murder),









(c) an offence under section 232 or 234 of 
the Criminal Code (manslaughter), or









(d) an offence under section 273 of the 
Criminal Code (aggravated sexual assault),









and who was sixteen or seventeen years of age 
at the time of the alleged commission of the 
offence shall be proceeded against in ordinary 
court in accordance with the law ordinarily 
applicable to an adult charged with the offence 
unless the youth court, on application by the 
young person, the young person's counsel or 
the Attorney General or an agent of the 
Attorney General, makes an order under 
subsection (1.04) or (1.05) or subparagraph 
(1.1)(a)(ii) that the young person should be 
proceeded against in youth court.







Making of 
application


(1.02) An application to the youth court 
under subsection (1.01) must be made orally, 
in the presence of the other party to the 
proceedings, or in writing, with a notice 
served on the other party to the proceedings.







Where 
application is 
opposed


(1.03) Where the other party to the 
proceedings referred to in subsection (1.02) 
files a notice of opposition to the application 
with the youth court within twenty-one days 
after the making of the oral application, or the 
service of the notice referred to in that 
subsection, as the case may be, the youth court 
shall, in accordance with subsection (1.1), 
determine whether the young person should 
be proceeded against in youth court.







Where 
application is 
unopposed


(1.04) Where the other party to the 
proceedings referred to in subsection (1.02) 
files a notice of non-opposition to the 
application with the youth court within the 
time referred to in subsection (1.03), the youth 
court shall order that the young person be 
proceeded against in youth court.







Deeming


(1.05) Where the other party to the 
proceedings referred to in subsection (1.02) 
does not file a notice referred to in subsection 
(1.03) or (1.04) within the time referred to in 
subsection (1.03), the youth court shall order 
that the young person be proceeded against in 
youth court.







Time may be 
extended


(1.06) The time referred to in subsections 
(1.03) to (1.05) may be extended by mutual 
agreement of the parties to the proceedings by 
filing a notice to that effect with the youth 
court.







Order


(1.1) In making the determination referred 
to in subsection (1) or (1.03), the youth court, 
after affording both parties and the parents of 
the young person an opportunity to be heard, 
shall consider the interest of society, which 
includes the objectives of affording protection 
to the public and rehabilitation of the young 
person, and determine whether those 
objectives can be reconciled by the youth 
being under the jurisdiction of the youth court, 
and










(a) if the court is of the opinion that those 
objectives can be so reconciled, the court 
shall









(i) in the case of an application under 
subsection (1), refuse to make an order 
that the young person be proceeded 
against in ordinary court, and









(ii) in the case of an application under 
subsection (1.01), order that the young 
person be proceeded against in youth 
court; or









(b) if the court is of the opinion that those 
objectives cannot be so reconciled, 
protection of the public shall be paramount 
and the court shall









(i) in the case of an application under 
subsection (1), order that the young 
person be proceeded against in ordinary 
court in accordance with the law 
ordinarily applicable to an adult charged 
with the offence, and









(ii) in the case of an application under 
subsection (1.01), refuse to make an 
order that the young person be proceeded 
against in youth court.






Onus


(1.11) Where an application is made under 
subsection (1) or (1.01), the onus of satisfying 
the youth court of the matters referred to in 
subsection (1.1) rests with the applicant.










(2) The portion of subsection 16(2) of the 
Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the 
following:







Consideration
s by youth 
court


(2) In making the determination referred to 
in subsection (1) or (1.03) in respect of a 
young person, a youth court shall take into 
account










(3) Subsection 16(3) of the Act is replaced 
by the following:







Pre-dispositio
n reports


(3) In making the determination referred to 
in subsection (1) or (1.03) in respect of a 
young person, a youth court shall consider a 
pre-disposition report.







1992, c. 11, 
s. 2(3)


(4) Subsections 16(7) and (8) of the Act 
are replaced by the following:







Effect of 
order


(7) Where an order is made under this 
section pursuant to an application under 
subsection (1), proceedings under this Act 
shall be discontinued and the young person 
against whom the proceedings are taken shall 
be taken before the ordinary court.







Idem


(7.1) Where an order is made under this 
section pursuant to an application under 
subsection (1.01), the proceedings against 
the young person shall be in the youth court.







Jurisdiction of 
ordinary court 
limited


(8) Where a young person is proceeded 
against in ordinary court in respect of an 
offence by reason of










(a) subsection (1.01), where no application 
is made under that subsection,









(b) an order made under subparagraph 
(1.1)(b)(i), or









(c) the refusal under subparagraph 
(1.1)(b)(ii) to make an order,









that court has jurisdiction only in respect of 
that offence or an offence included therein.







1992, c. 11, 
s. 2(3)


9. Subsections 16.1(1) and (2) of the Act 
are replaced by the following:







Detention 
pending 
trial - young 
person under 
eighteen


16.1 (1) Notwithstanding anything in this or 
any other Act of Parliament, where a young 
person who is under the age of eighteen is to 
be proceeded against in ordinary court by 
reason of










(a) subsection 16(1.01), where no 
application is made under that subsection,









(b) an order under subparagraph 
16(1.1)(b)(i), or









(c) the refusal under subparagraph 
16(1.1)(b)(ii) to make an order,









and the young person is to be in custody 
pending the proceedings in that court, the 
young person shall be held separate and apart 
from any adult who is detained or held in 
custody unless the youth court is satisfied, on 
application, that the young person, having 
regard to the best interests of the young person 
and the safety of others, cannot be detained in 
a place of detention for young persons.







Detention 
pending 
trial - young 
person over 
eighteen


(2) Notwithstanding anything in this or any 
other Act of Parliament, where a young person 
who is over the age of eighteen is to be 
proceeded against in ordinary court by reason 
of










(a) subsection 16(1.01), where no 
application is made under that subsection,









(b) an order under subparagraph 
16(1.1)(b)(i), or









(c) the refusal under subparagraph 
16(1.1)(b)(ii) to make an order,









and the young person is to be in custody 
pending the proceedings in that court, the 
young person shall be held in a place of 
detention for adults unless the youth court is 
satisfied, on application, that the young 
person, having regard to the best interests of 
the young person and the safety of others, 
should be detained in a place of custody for 
young persons.








