





1st Session, 37th Parliament,
49-50 Elizabeth II, 2001 










House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-331









An Act to recognize the injustice that was 
done to persons of Ukrainian descent and 
other Europeans who were interned at the 
time of the First World War and to 
provide for public commemoration and 
for restitution which is to be devoted to 
education and the promotion of tolerance







Preamble


Whereas persons of Ukrainian descent and 
other Europeans were imprisoned, 
disenfranchised and dispossessed of their 
assets without just cause at the time of the First 
World War and were kept there from 1914 to 
1920; and










 Whereas it is beyond time that public 
recognition be made of this injustice and 
appropriate commemoration and public 
education undertaken;










Now, Therefore, Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate and House of 
Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:










 






Short title


1. This Act may be cited as the Ukrainian 
Canadian Restitution Act.







Memorial 
plaques and 
museum


2. (1) The Minister of Canadian Heritage 
shall










(a) cause memorial plaques to be installed 
at any of the twenty-four concentration 
camps at which persons of Ukrainian 
descent and other Europeans were interned 
during and after the First World War, which 
do not yet have such plaques, describing the 
events at that time and the regrets of 
present-day Canadians, written in 
Ukrainian, English and French;









(b) ensure that all memorial plaques at 
concentration camps, whenever installed, 
are properly maintained; and









(c) establish a permanent museum in Banff 
National Park, at the site of the 
concentration camp that was established 
there, with signage in Ukrainian, English 
and French, providing information on









(i) the operation of all the concentration 
camps established in Canada at the time 
of the First World War; and









(ii) the role that Ukrainian Canadians 
have played in the building of Canada 
since that time.






Opening 
ceremony


(2) The Minister of Canadian Heritage shall 
arrange for suitable ceremonies at the time of 
installation of each memorial plaque and at 
the opening of the museum.







Restitution


3. (1) The Minister of Canadian Heritage, in 
cooperation with the Minister of Finance, 
shall negotiate with the Ukrainian Canadian 
Civil Liberties Association a suitable payment 
in restitution for the confiscation of property 
and other assets from Ukrainian Canadians.







Application of 
restitution


(2) The restitution payment shall be applied 
to










(a) the development and production of 
educational materials that cover Canada's 
past internment policies and activities and 
their distribution to schools, colleges and 
universities, with the objective of widening 
understanding of the harm of ethnic, 
religious or racial intolerance and 
discrimination, and the importance of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
in protecting all Canadians from such 
injustice in the future; and









(b) such other educational projects as are 
agreed to in consultation with the Ukrainian 
Canadian Civil Liberties Association.






Commemorati
ve postage 
stamps


4. The Minister of Public Works and 
Government Services shall instruct Canada 
Post Corporation to issue a stamp or set of 
stamps to commemorate the internment of 
persons of Ukrainian descent and other 
Europeans during the First World War.







Review of 
Emergencies 
Act


5. The Minister of Justice shall undertake a 
review of the Emergencies Act and report to 
Parliament within a year of the date this Act 
comes into force with recommendations on 
any legislative changes necessary to ensure 
that unjust internment such as that described 
in the preamble never again occurs in Canada.








