





2nd Session, 37th Parliament,
51 Elizabeth II, 2002 










House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-204









An Act to amend the Youth Criminal Justice 
Act










Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:






2002, c. 1


YOUTH CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT









1. Subsection 2(1) of the Youth Criminal 
Justice Act is amended by adding the 
following in alphabetical order:







``home 
invasion 
offence''
« infraction 
d'invasion de 
domicile »


``home invasion offence'' means an offence 
committed by a young person under 
paragraph 348(1)(d) (breaking and entering 
in relation to a dwelling-house) of the 
Criminal Code or an offence committed by 
a young person in relation to a 
dwelling-house under any of subsection 
279(2) (forcible confinement) and sections 
343 (robbery) and 346 (extortion) of that 
Act, if the dwelling-house was occupied at 
the time of the commission of the offence 
and the young person, in committing the 
offence, knew that or was reckless as to 
whether the dwelling-house was occupied 
and used violence or threats of violence to 
a person or property.  










2. Section 42 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (2):







Home 
invasion


(2.1) Despite paragraph (2)(k), when a 
youth justice court finds a young person guilty 
of a home invasion offence and is imposing a 
youth sentence, the court shall, in addition to 
any other punishment imposed by the court 
under subsection (2), place the young person 
on probation with the condition that the young 
person comply with a curfew which shall 
remain in effect for a period of one year or for 
a period that ends when the young person 
becomes eighteen years of age, whichever 
period is greater, to a maximum of three years.







Subsequent 
offences


(2.2) When a youth justice court finds a 
young person guilty of a second or subsequent 
home invasion offence and is imposing a 
youth sentence, the court shall, in addition to 
any other punishment imposed by the court 
under subsection (2), order the young person 
to serve a minimum sentence of thirty days in 
custody.  










3. The Act is amended by adding the 
following after section 55:







Duty to report 
breach


55.1 (1) Any responsible person who 
becomes aware that a young person has 
breached the condition referred to in 
subsection 42(2.1) shall immediately report 
the breach to the authority responsible for 
monitoring the young person's probation.







Duty to report 
breach


(2) Any responsible person who becomes 
aware that a young person has breached a 
condition of an order referred to in section 55 
shall immediately report the breach to the 
authority responsible for monitoring the 
young person's probation unless the judge, at 
the time the order was made, specified that a 
breach of that condition was not required to be 
reported under this subsection.







Responsible 
person


(3) For the purposes of this section, 
``responsible person'' means a custodial 
parent of a young person or any person who is 
directly responsible for monitoring the young 
person's probation.  










4. Section 139 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (3):







Failure to 
report breach


(4) Every person who fails to report the 
breach of a condition referred to in subsection 
42(2.1) or section 55 when required to do so 
under section 55.1 is guilty of an offence 
punishable on summary conviction and is 
liable to a fine not exceeding two thousand 
dollars or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding six months or to both.  










COMING INTO FORCE









5. This Act comes into force on the last 
day on which any of sections 2, 42, 55 and 
139 of the Youth Criminal Justice Act, 
chapter 1 of the Statutes of Canada, 2002, 
come into force.








