






46 ELIZABETH II









CHAPTER 39











An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the 
Interpretation Act (powers to arrest and 
enter dwellings)










[Assented to 18th December, 1997] 







Preamble


 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that the measures provided for in 
this Act must be consistent with the rights and 
freedoms guaranteed in the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms and, in particular, the 
right to a reasonable expectation of privacy 
within one's dwelling-house;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that there is a societal interest in 
having a clear legislative framework to 
regulate the entry of peace officers into a 
dwelling-house for the purposes of arresting 
or apprehending a person where a warrant for 
the arrest or apprehension of that person or the 
grounds to arrest that person exist;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that there is a societal interest in 
the proper administration of justice including 
effective law enforcement, and that to achieve 
effective law enforcement, peace officers 
must be granted the power to enter a 
dwelling-house to arrest or apprehend persons 
who they believe have committed a criminal 
offence or have breached the provisions of an 
Act of Parliament other than the Criminal 
Code for which arrest or apprehension is 
authorized;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that while it is necessary for peace 
officers to obtain prior judicial authorization 
to enter a dwelling-house in order to arrest or 
apprehend a person, circumstances may 
nonetheless exist that justify entry into a 
dwelling-house for such a purpose in the 
absence of prior judicial authorization;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes the societal importance of 
providing peace officers with the ability to 
effectively respond to urgent calls for 
assistance, particularly in the context of 
domestic violence;










 Whereas the Parliament of Canada declares 
that nothing in this Act is intended to limit or 
restrict the circumstances under which peace 
officers may be justified in entering a 
dwelling-house for the purposes of arrest or 
apprehension in the absence of prior judicial 
authorization, under this or any other Act or 
law, including the common law;










 And Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
declares that nothing in this Act is intended to 
limit or restrict the ability of peace officers to 
enter a dwelling-house for purposes other than 
arrest or apprehension, under this or any other 
Act or law, including the common law;










NOW, THEREFORE, Her Majesty, by and 
with the advice and consent of the Senate and 
House of Commons of Canada, enacts as 
follows:










 






R.S., c. C-46; 
R.S., cc. 2, 11, 
27, 31, 47, 51, 
52 (1st 
Supp.), cc. 1, 
24, 27, 35 
(2nd Supp.), 
cc. 10, 19, 30, 
34 (3rd 
Supp.), cc. 1, 
23, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 40, 42, 50 
(4th Supp.); 
1989, c. 2; 
1990, cc. 15, 
16, 17, 44; 
1991, cc. 1, 4, 
28, 40, 43; 
1992, cc. 1, 
11, 20, 21, 22, 
27, 38, 41, 47, 
51; 1993, cc. 
7, 25, 28, 34, 
37, 40, 45, 46; 
1994, cc. 12, 
13, 38, 44; 
1995, cc. 5, 
19, 22, 27, 29, 
32, 39, 42; 
1996, cc. 8, 
16, 19, 31, 34; 
1997, cc. 9, 
16, 17, 18, 23, 
30


CRIMINAL CODE






1997, c. 23, 
s. 14


1. The portion of subsection 487.3(1) of 
the Criminal Code before paragraph (a) is 
replaced by the following:







Order denying 
access to 
information 
used to obtain 
any warrant


487.3 (1) A judge or justice may, on 
application made at the time of issuing a 
warrant under this or any other Act of 
Parliament or of granting an authorization to 
enter a dwelling-house under section 529 or an 
authorization under section 529.4 or at any 
time thereafter, make an order prohibiting 
access to and the disclosure of any 
information relating to the warrant or 
authorization on the ground that










2. The Act is amended by adding the 
following after section 528:










Powers to Enter Dwelling-houses to Carry 
out Arrests






Including 
authorization 
to enter in 
warrant of 
arrest


529. (1) A warrant to arrest or apprehend a 
person issued by a judge or justice under this 
or any other Act of Parliament may authorize 
a peace officer, subject to subsection (2), to 
enter a dwelling-house described in the 
warrant for the purpose of arresting or 
apprehending the person if the judge or justice 
is satisfied by information on oath in writing 
that there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the person is or will be present in the 
dwelling-house.







Execution


(2) An authorization to enter a 
dwelling-house granted under subsection (1) 
is subject to the condition that the peace 
officer may not enter the dwelling-house 
unless the peace officer has, immediately 
before entering the dwelling-house, 
reasonable grounds to believe that the person 
to be arrested or apprehended is present in the 
dwelling-house.







Warrant to 
enter 
dwelling-
house


529.1 A judge or justice may issue a warrant 
in Form 7.1 authorizing a peace officer to 
enter a dwelling-house described in the 
warrant for the purpose of arresting or 
apprehending a person identified or 
identifiable by the warrant if the judge or 
justice is satisfied by information on oath that 
there are reasonable grounds to believe that 
the person is or will be present in the 
dwelling-house and that










(a) a warrant referred to in this or any other 
Act of Parliament to arrest or apprehend the 
person is in force anywhere in Canada;









(b) grounds exist to arrest the person 
without warrant under paragraph 495(1)(a) 
or (b); or









(c) grounds exist to arrest or apprehend 
without warrant the person under an Act of 
Parliament, other than this Act.






Reasonable 
terms and 
conditions


529.2 Subject to section 529.4, the judge or 
justice shall include in a warrant referred to in 
section 529 or 529.1 any terms and conditions 
that the judge or justice considers advisable to 
ensure that the entry into the dwelling-house 
is reasonable in the circumstances.







Authority to 
enter dwelling 
without 
warrant


529.3 (1) Without limiting or restricting any 
power a peace officer may have to enter a 
dwelling-house under this or any other Act or 
law, the peace officer may enter the 
dwelling-house for the purpose of arresting or 
apprehending a person, without a warrant 
referred to in section 529 or 529.1 authorizing 
the entry, if the peace officer has reasonable 
grounds to believe that the person is present in 
the dwelling-house, and the conditions for 
obtaining a warrant under section 529.1 exist 
but by reason of exigent circumstances it 
would be impracticable to obtain a warrant.







Exigent 
circumstances


(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), 
exigent circumstances include circumstances 
in which the peace officer










(a) has reasonable grounds to suspect that 
entry into the dwelling-house is necessary 
to prevent imminent bodily harm or death to 
any person; or









(b) has reasonable grounds to believe that 
evidence relating to the commission of an 
indictable offence is present in the 
dwelling-house and that entry into the 
dwelling-house is necessary to prevent the 
imminent loss or imminent destruction of 
the evidence.






Omitting 
announce-
ment before 
entry


529.4 (1) A judge or justice who authorizes 
a peace officer to enter a dwelling-house 
under section 529 or 529.1, or any other judge 
or justice, may authorize the peace officer to 
enter the dwelling-house without prior 
announcement if the judge or justice is 
satisfied by information on oath that there are 
reasonable grounds to believe that prior 
announcement of the entry would










(a) expose the peace officer or any other 
person to imminent bodily harm or death; or









(b) result in the imminent loss or imminent 
destruction of evidence relating to the 
commission of an indictable offence.






Execution of 
authorization


(2) An authorization under this section is 
subject to the condition that the peace officer 
may not enter the dwelling-house without 
prior announcement despite being authorized 
to do so unless the peace officer has, 
immediately before entering the 
dwelling-house,










(a) reasonable grounds to suspect that prior 
announcement of the entry would expose 
the peace officer or any other person to 
imminent bodily harm or death; or









(b) reasonable grounds to believe that prior 
announcement of the entry would result in 
the imminent loss or imminent destruction 
of evidence relating to the commission of 
an indictable offence.






Exception


(3) A peace officer who enters a 
dwelling-house without a warrant under 
section 529.3 may not enter the 
dwelling-house without prior announcement 
unless the peace officer has, immediately 
before entering the dwelling-house,










(a) reasonable grounds to suspect that prior 
announcement of the entry would expose 
the peace officer or any other person to 
imminent bodily harm or death; or









(b) reasonable grounds to believe that prior 
announcement of the entry would result in 
the imminent loss or imminent destruction 
of evidence relating to the commission of 
an indictable offence.






Telewarrant


529.5 If a peace officer believes that it 
would be impracticable in the circumstances 
to appear personally before a judge or justice 
to make an application for a warrant under 
section 529.1 or an authorization under 
section 529 or 529.4, the warrant or 
authorization may be issued on an information 
submitted by telephone or other means of 
telecommunication and, for that purpose, 
section 487.1 applies, with any modifications 
that the circumstances require, to the warrant 
or authorization.







R.S., c. 27 (1st 
Supp.), s. 203


3. Form 7 in Part XXVIII of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










FORM 7









(Sections 475, 493, 597, 800 and 803)










WARRANT FOR ARREST









 Canada,
Province of ................,
(territorial division).










To the peace officers in the said (territorial 
division):










 This warrant is issued for the arrest of A.B., 
of ................, (occupation), hereinafter called 
the accused.










 Whereas the accused has been charged that 
(set out briefly the offence in respect of which 
the accused is charged);










 And whereas:*










(a) there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that it is necessary in the public interest to 
issue this warrant for the arrest of the 
accused [507(4), 512(1)];









(b) the accused failed to attend court in 
accordance with the summons served on 
him [512(2)];









(c) (an appearance notice or a promise to 
appear or a recognizance entered into 
before an officer in charge) was confirmed 
and the accused failed to attend court in 
accordance therewith [512(2)];









(d) it appears that a summons cannot be 
served because the accused is evading 
service [512(2)];









(e) the accused was ordered to be present at 
the hearing of an application for a review of 
an order made by a justice and did not attend 
the hearing [520(5), 521(5)];









(f) there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the accused has contravened or is about 
to contravene the (promise to appear or 
undertaking or recognizance) on which he 
was released [524(1), 525(5), 679(6)];









(g) there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the accused has since his release from 
custody on (a promise to appear or an 
undertaking or a recognizance) committed 
an indictable offence [524(1), 525(5), 
679(6)];









(h) the accused was required by (an 
appearance notice or a promise to appear or 
a recognizance entered into before an 
officer in charge or a summons) to attend at 
a time and place stated therein for the 
purposes of the Identification of Criminals 
Act and did not appear at that time and place 
[502, 510];









(i) an indictment has been found against the 
accused and the accused has not appeared or 
remained in attendance before the court for 
his trial [597];









(j) **









 This is, therefore, to command you, in Her 
Majesty's name, forthwith to arrest the said 
accused and to bring him before (state court, 
judge or justice), to be dealt with according to 
law.










 (Add where applicable) Whereas there are 
reasonable grounds to believe that the accused 
may be present in (here describe 
dwelling-house);










 This warrant is also issued to authorize you 
to enter the dwelling-house for the purpose of 
arresting or apprehending the accused, subject 
to the condition that you may not enter the 
dwelling-house unless you have, immediately 
before entering the dwelling-house, 
reasonable grounds to believe that the person 
to be arrested or apprehended is present in the 
dwelling-house.










 Dated this ................ day of ................ 
A.D. ........, at ................ .










........................................
Judge, Clerk of the Court,
Provincial Court Judge or Justice










 * Initial applicable recital.










 ** For any case not covered by recitals (a) 
to (i), insert recital in the words of the statute 
authorizing the warrant.










FORM 7.1









(Section 529.1)










WARRANT TO ENTER 
DWELLING-HOUSE









 Canada,
Province of ................,
(territorial division).










To the peace officers in the said (territorial 
division):










 This warrant is issued in respect of the arrest 
of A.B., or a person with the following 
description (     ), of ................, 
(occupation).










 Whereas there are reasonable grounds to 
believe:*










(a) a warrant referred to in this or any other 
Act of Parliament to arrest or apprehend the 
person is in force anywhere in Canada;









(b) grounds exist to arrest the person 
without warrant under paragraph 495(1)(a) 
or (b) of the Criminal Code; or









(c) grounds exist to arrest or apprehend 
without warrant the person under an Act of 
Parliament, other than this Act;









 And whereas there are reasonable grounds 
to believe that the person is or will be present 
in (here describe dwelling-house);










 This warrant is issued to authorize you to 
enter the dwelling-house for the purpose of 
arresting or apprehending the person.










 Dated this ................ day of ................ 
A.D. ........, at ................ .










........................................
Judge, Clerk of the Court,
Provincial Court Judge or Justice










 * Initial applicable recital.








