













Second Session, Forty-first Parliament,
62-63 Elizabeth II, 2013-2014





Deuxième session, quarante et unième législature,
62-63 Elizabeth II, 2013-2014






STATUTES OF CANADA 2014CHAPTER 20





LOIS DU CANADA (2014)CHAPITRE 20




























An Act to implement certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on February 11, 2014 and other measures





Loi portant exécution de certaines dispositions du budget déposé au Parlement le 11 février 2014 et mettant en oeuvre d’autres mesures













ASSENTED TO
19th JUNE, 2014
BILL C-31

SANCTIONNÉE
LE 19 JUIN 2014
PROJET DE LOI C-31





















RECOMMENDATION
His Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House of Commons the appropriation of public revenue under the circumstances, in the manner and for the purposes set out in a measure entitled “An Act to implement certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on February 11, 2014 and other measures”.
SUMMARY
Part 1 implements income tax measures and related measures proposed in the February 11, 2014 budget. Most notably, it
(a) increases the maximum amount of eligible expenses for the adoption expense tax credit;
(b) expands the list of expenses eligible for the medical expense tax credit to include the cost of the design of individualized therapy plans and costs associated with service animals for people with severe diabetes;
(c) introduces the search and rescue volunteers tax credit;
(d) extends, for one year, the mineral exploration tax credit for flow-through share investors;
(e) expands the circumstances in which members of underfunded pension plans can benefit from unreduced pension-to-RRSP transfer limits;
(f) eliminates the need for individuals to apply for the GST/HST credit and allows the Minister of National Revenue to automatically determine if an individual is eligible to receive the credit;
(g) extends to 10 years the carry-forward period with respect to certain donations of ecologically sensitive land;
(h) removes, for certified cultural property acquired as part of a gifting arrangement that is a tax shelter, the exemption from the rule that deems the value of a gift to be no greater than its cost to the donor;
(i) allows the Minister of National Revenue to refuse to register, or revoke the registration of, a charity or Canadian amateur athletic association that accepts a donation from a state supporter of terrorism;
(j) reduces, for certain small and medium-sized employers, the frequency of remittances for source deductions;
(k) improves the Canada Revenue Agency’s ability to provide feedback to the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada; and
(l) requires a listing of outstanding tax measures to be tabled in Parliament.
Part 1 also implements other selected income tax measures. Most notably, it
(a) introduces transitional rules relating to the labour-sponsored venture capital corporations tax credit;
(b) requires certain financial intermediaries to report to the Canada Revenue Agency international electronic funds transfers of $10,000 or more;
(c) makes amendments relating to the introduction of the Offshore Tax Informant Program of the Canada Revenue Agency;
(d) permits the disclosure of taxpayer information to an appropriate police organization in certain circumstances if the information relates to a serious offence; and
(e) provides that the Business Development Bank of Canada and BDC Capital Inc. are not financial institutions for the purposes of the Income Tax Act’s mark-to-market rules.
Part 2 implements certain goods and services tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/HST) measures proposed in the February 11, 2014 budget by
(a) expanding the GST/HST exemption for training that is specially designed to assist individuals with a disorder or disability to include the service of designing such training;
(b) expanding the GST/HST exemption for services rendered to individuals by certain health care practitioners to include professional services rendered by acupuncturists and naturopathic doctors;
(c) adding eyewear specially designed to treat or correct a defect of vision by electronic means to the list of GST/HST zero-rated medical and assistive devices;
(d) extending to newly created members of a group the election that allows members of a closely-related group to not account for GST/HST on certain supplies between them, introducing joint and several (or solidary) liability for the parties to that election for any GST/HST liability on those supplies and adding a requirement to file that election with the Canada Revenue Agency;
(e) giving the Minister of National Revenue the discretionary authority to register a person for GST/HST purposes if the person fails to comply with the requirement to apply for registration, even after having been notified by the Canada Revenue Agency of that requirement; and
(f) improving the Canada Revenue Agency’s ability to provide feedback to the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada.
Part 2 also implements other GST/HST measures by
(a) providing a GST/HST exemption for supplies of hospital parking for patients and visitors, clarifying that the GST/HST exemption for supplies of a property, when all or substantially all of the supplies of the property by a charity are made for free, does not apply to paid parking and clarifying that paid parking provided by charities that are set up or used by municipalities, universities, public colleges, schools and hospitals to operate their parking facilities does not qualify for the special GST/HST exemption for parking supplied by charities;
(b) clarifying that reports of international electronic funds transfers made to the Canada Revenue Agency may be used for the purposes of the administration of the GST/HST;
(c) making amendments relating to the introduction of the Offshore Tax Informant Program of the Canada Revenue Agency;
(d) permitting the disclosure of confidential GST/HST information to an appropriate police organization in certain circumstances if the information relates to a serious offence; and
(e) clarifying that a person cannot claim input tax credits in respect of an amount of GST/HST that has already been recovered by the person from a supplier.
Part 3 implements excise measures proposed in the February 11, 2014 budget by
(a) adjusting the domestic rate of excise duty on tobacco products to account for inflation and eliminating the preferential excise duty treatment of tobacco products available through duty free markets;
(b) ensuring that excise tax returns are filed accurately through the addition of a new administrative monetary penalty and an amended criminal offence for the making of false statements or omissions, consistent with similar provisions in the GST/HST portion of the Excise Tax Act; and
(c) improving the Canada Revenue Agency’s ability to provide feedback to the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada.
Part 3 also implements other excise measures by
(a) permitting the disclosure of confidential information to an appropriate police organization in certain circumstances if the information relates to a serious offence; and
(b) making amendments relating to the introduction of the Offshore Tax Informant Program of the Canada Revenue Agency.
In addition, Part 3 amends the Air Travellers Security Charge Act, the Excise Act, 2001 and the Excise Tax Act to clarify that reports of international electronic funds transfers made to the Canada Revenue Agency may be used for the purposes of the administration of those Acts.
Part 4 amends the Customs Tariff. In particular, it
(a) reduces the Most-Favoured-Nation rates of duty and, if applicable, rates of duty under the other tariff treatments on tariff items related to mobile offshore drilling units used in oil and gas exploration and development that are imported on or after May 5, 2014;
(b) removes the exemption provided by tariff item 9809.00.00 and makes consequential amendments to tariff item 9833.00.00 to apply the same tariff rules to the Governor General that are applied to other public office holders; and
(c) clarifies the tariff classification of certain imported food products, effective November 29, 2013.
Part 5 enacts the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act and amends the Income Tax Act to introduce consequential information reporting requirements.
Part 6 enacts and amends several Acts in order to implement various measures.
Division 1 of Part 6 provides for payments to compensate for deductions in certain benefits and allowances that are payable under the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act, the War Veterans Allowance Act and the Civilian War-related Benefits Act.
Division 2 of Part 6 amends the Bank of Canada Act and the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation Act to authorize the Bank of Canada to provide banking and custodial services to the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Division 3 of Part 6 amends the Hazardous Products Act to better regulate the sale and importation of hazardous products intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada in accordance with the Regulatory Cooperation Council Joint Action Plan initiative for work place chemicals. In particular, the amendments implement the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals with respect to, among other things, labelling and safety data sheet requirements. It also provides for enhanced powers related to administration and enforcement. Finally, it makes amendments to the Canada Labour Code and the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act.
Division 4 of Part 6 amends the Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act to authorize individuals to transport beer and spirits from one province to another for their personal consumption.
Division 5 of Part 6 amends the Judges Act to increase the number of judges of the Superior Court of Quebec and the Court of Queen’s Bench of Alberta.
Division 6 of Part 6 amends the Members of Parliament Retiring Allowances Act to prohibit parliamentarians from contributing to their pension and accruing pensionable service as a result of a suspension.
Division 7 of Part 6 amends the National Defence Act to recognize the historic names of the Royal Canadian Navy, the Canadian Army and the Royal Canadian Air Force while preserving the integration and the unification achieved under the Canadian Forces Reorganization Act and to provide that the designations of rank and the circumstances of their use are prescribed in regulations made by the Governor in Council.
Division 8 of Part 6 amends the Customs Act to extend to 90 days the time for making a request for a review of a seizure, ascertained forfeiture or penalty assessment and to provide that requests for a review and third-party claims can be made directly to the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness.
Division 9 of Part 6 amends the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act to provide for the dissolution of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Board and to repeal the requirement for the President of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency to submit a comprehensive report every five years on the Agency’s activities and on the impact those activities have had on regional disparity.
Division 10 of Part 6 dissolves the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation and authorizes, among other things, the transfer of its assets and obligations, as well as those of its subsidiaries, to either the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency or Her Majesty in right of Canada as represented by the Minister of Public Works and Government Services. It also provides that the employees of the Corporation and its subsidiaries are deemed to have been appointed under the Public Service Employment Act and includes provisions related to their terms and conditions of employment. Furthermore, it amends the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act to, among other things, confer on the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency the authority that is necessary for the administration, management, control and disposal of the assets and obligations transferred to the Agency. It also makes consequential amendments to other Acts and repeals the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation Act.
Division 11 of Part 6 provides for the transfer of responsibility for the administration of the programs known as the “Online Works of Reference” and the “Virtual Museum of Canada” from the Minister of Canadian Heritage to the Canadian Museum of History.
Division 12 of Part 6 amends the Nordion and Theratronics Divestiture Authorization Act to remove certain restrictions on the acquisition of voting shares of Nordion.
Division 13 of Part 6 amends the Bank Act to add regulation-making powers respecting a bank’s activities in relation to derivatives and benchmarks.
Division 14 of Part 6 amends the Insurance Companies Act to broaden the Governor in Council’s authority to make regulations respecting the conversion of a mutual company into a company with common shares.
Division 15 of Part 6 amends the Motor Vehicle Safety Act to support the objectives of the Regulatory Cooperation Council to enhance the alignment of Canadian and U.S. regulations while protecting Canadians. It introduces measures to accelerate and streamline the regulatory process, reduce the administrative burden for manufacturers and importers and improve safety for Canadians through revised oversight procedures and enhanced availability of vehicle safety information.
The amendments to the Railway Safety Act and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act, 1992 modernize the legislation by aligning it with the Cabinet Directive on Regulatory Management.
This Division also amends the Safe Food for Canadians Act to authorize the Governor in Council to make regulations respecting activities related to specified fresh fruits and vegetables, including requiring a person who engages in certain activities to be a member of a specified entity or organization. It also repeals the Board of Arbitration.
Division 16 of Part 6 amends the Telecommunications Act to set a maximum amount that a Canadian carrier can charge to another Canadian carrier for certain roaming services.
Division 17 of Part 6 amends the Canada Labour Code to allow employees to interrupt their compassionate care leave or leave related to their child’s critical illness, death or disappearance in order to take leave because of sickness or a work-related illness or injury. It also amends the Employment Insurance Act to facilitate access to sickness benefits for claimants who are in receipt of compassionate care benefits or benefits for parents of critically ill children.
Division 18 of Part 6 amends the Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act to provide that fees fixed under that Act for the use of a facility provided by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency under the Safe Food for Canadians Act as well as fees fixed for services, products and rights and privileges provided by the Agency under that Act are exempt from the application of the User Fees Act.
Division 19 of Part 6 amends the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act to, among other things, enhance the client identification, record keeping and registration requirements for financial institutions and intermediaries, refer to online casinos, and extend the application of the Act to persons and entities that deal in virtual currencies and foreign money services businesses. Furthermore, it makes modifications in regards to the information that the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada may receive, collect or disclose, and expands the circumstances in which the Centre or the Canada Border Services Agency can disclose information received or collected under the Act. It also updates the review and appeal provisions related to cross-border currency reporting and brings Part 1.1 of the Act into force.
Division 20 of Part 6 amends the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act and the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 to, among other things,
(a) require certain applications to be made electronically;
(b) provide for the making of regulations regarding the establishment of a system of administrative monetary penalties for the contravention of conditions applicable to employers hiring foreign workers;
(c) provide for the termination of certain applications for permanent residence in respect of which a decision as to whether the selection criteria are met is not made before February 11, 2014; and
(d) clarify and strengthen requirements related to the expression of interest regime.
Division 21 of Part 6 amends the Public Service Labour Relations Act to clarify that an adjudicator may grant systemic remedies when it has been determined that the employer has engaged in a discriminatory practice.
It also clarifies the transitional provisions in respect of essential services that were enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2.
Division 22 of Part 6 amends the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 to clarify how payments to provinces under section 99 of that Act are to be determined.
Division 23 of Part 6 amends the Budget Implementation Act, 2009 so that the aggregate amount of payments to provinces and territories for matters relating to the establishment of a Canadian securities regulation regime may be fixed through an appropriation Act.
Division 24 of Part 6 amends the Protection of Residential Mortgage or Hypothecary Insurance Act and the National Housing Act to provide that certain criteria established in a regulation may apply to an existing insured mortgage or hypothecary loan.
Division 25 of Part 6 amends the Trade-marks Act to, among other things, make that Act consistent with the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks and add the authority to make regulations for carrying into effect the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks. The amendments include the simplification of the requirements for obtaining a filing date in relation to an application for the registration of a trade-mark, the elimination of the requirement to declare use of a trade-mark before registration, the reduction of the term of registration of a trade-mark from 15 to 10 years, and the adoption of the classification established by the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks.
Division 26 of Part 6 amends the Trade-marks Act to repeal the power to appoint the Registrar of Trade-marks and to provide that the Registrar is the person appointed as Commissioner of Patents under subsection 4(1) of the Patent Act.
Division 27 of Part 6 amends the Old Age Security Act to prevent the payment of Old Age Security income-tested benefits for the entire period of a sponsorship undertaking by removing the current 10-year cap.
Division 28 of Part 6 enacts the New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act, respecting the construction and operation of a new bridge in Montreal to replace the Champlain Bridge and the Nuns’ Island Bridge.
Division 29 of Part 6 enacts the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act, which establishes the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada (ATSSC) as a portion of the federal public administration. The ATSSC becomes the sole provider of resources and staff for 11 administrative tribunals and provides facilities and support services to those tribunals, including registry, administrative, research and analysis services. The Division also makes consequential amendments to the Acts establishing those tribunals and to other Acts related to those tribunals.
Division 30 of Part 6 enacts the Apprentice Loans Act, which provides for financial assistance for apprentices to help with the cost of their training. Under that Act, apprentices registered in eligible trades will be eligible for loans that will be interest-free until their training ends.



RECOMMANDATION
Son Excellence le gouverneur général recommande à la Chambre des communes l’affectation de deniers publics dans les circonstances, de la manière et aux fins prévues dans une mesure intitulée « Loi portant exécution de certaines dispositions du budget déposé au Parlement le 11 février 2014 et mettant en oeuvre d’autres mesures ».
SOMMAIRE
La partie 1 du texte met en oeuvre des mesures relatives à l’impôt sur le revenu et des mesures connexes qui ont été proposées dans le budget du 11 février 2014 pour, notamment :
a) hausser le plafond des dépenses admissibles au crédit d’impôt pour frais d’adoption;
b) ajouter à la liste des dépenses admissibles au crédit d’impôt pour frais médicaux le coût de la conception de plans de traitement personnalisés et les coûts liés aux animaux d’assistance dressés pour aider les personnes atteintes de diabète grave;
c) mettre en place le crédit d’impôt pour volontaires en recherche et sauvetage;
d) prolonger d’une année le crédit d’impôt pour l’exploration minière pour les détenteurs d’actions accréditives;
e) élargir les circonstances dans lesquelles les participants à des régimes de pension sous-capitalisés peuvent bénéficier de plafonds non réduits pour les transferts de prestations de retraite à des REER;
f) éliminer la nécessité pour les particuliers de demander le crédit d’impôt pour TPS/TVH et permettre au ministre du Revenu national de déterminer automatiquement si un particulier a droit au crédit;
g) porter à dix ans la période de report prospectif relative à certains dons de fonds de terre écosensibles;
h) éliminer, à l’égard de biens culturels certifiés acquis dans le cadre d’un arrangement de don qui est un abri fiscal, l’exemption de la règle selon laquelle la valeur d’un don est réputée ne pas être supérieure à son coût pour le donateur;
i) permettre au ministre du Revenu national de refuser d’enregistrer un organisme de bienfaisance ou une association canadienne enregistrée de sport amateur qui accepte un don d’un État qui soutient le terrorisme, ou de révoquer son enregistrement;
j) réduire la fréquence des versements de retenues à la source effectués par certains petits et moyens employeurs;
k) améliorer la capacité de l’Agence du revenu du Canada à fournir des commentaires au Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada;
l) prévoir le dépôt au Parlement d’une liste des mesures fiscales en instance.
En outre, elle met en oeuvre d’autres mesures relatives à l’impôt sur le revenu pour, notamment :
a) mettre en place des règles transitoires relatives au crédit d’impôt relatif aux sociétés à capital de risque de travailleurs;
b) exiger de certains intermédiaires financiers qu’ils déclarent à l’Agence du revenu du Canada les télévirements internationaux de 10 000 $ ou plus;
c) apporter des modifications découlant de la mise sur pied du Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale à l’étranger de l’Agence du revenu du Canada;
d) permettre que des renseignements confidentiels soient fournis à l’organisation de police compétente dans certaines circonstances où les renseignements ont trait à une infraction grave;
e) prévoir que la Banque de développement du Canada et la BDC Capital Inc. ne sont pas des institutions financières pour l’application des règles de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu concernant les biens évalués à la valeur du marché.
La partie 2 met en oeuvre certaines mesures relatives à la taxe sur les produits et services et à la taxe de vente harmonisée (TPS/TVH) qui ont été proposées dans le budget du 11 février 2014 pour, notamment :
a) étendre l’exonération de TPS/TVH visant la formation conçue spécialement pour aider les particuliers ayant un trouble ou une déficience aux services de conception d’une telle formation;
b) étendre l’exonération de TPS/TVH visant les services rendus à des particuliers par certains praticiens du domaine de la santé aux services professionnels rendus par les acupuncteurs et les docteurs en naturopathie;
c) ajouter à la liste des appareils médicaux et appareils fonctionnels détaxés sous le régime de la TPS/TVH les appareils d’optique conçus spécialement pour traiter ou corriger un trouble visuel par voie électronique;
d) étendre aux membres d’un groupe nouvellement créés le choix qui permet aux membres d’un groupe étroitement lié de ne pas tenir compte de la TPS/TVH sur certaines fournitures effectuées entre eux; faire en sorte que les parties à ce choix soient solidairement responsables du paiement de toute TPS/TVH sur ces fournitures; et exiger que le formulaire concernant ce choix soit présenté à l’Agence du revenu du Canada;
e) conférer au ministre du Revenu national le pouvoir discrétionnaire d’inscrire sous le régime de la TPS/TVH toute personne qui omet de se conformer à l’exigence d’inscription, même après avoir été avisée de cette exigence par l’Agence du revenu du Canada;
f) améliorer la capacité de l’Agence du revenu du Canada à fournir des commentaires au Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada.
En outre, elle met en oeuvre d’autres mesures relatives à la TPS/TVH pour, notamment :
a) exonérer de la TPS/TVH les fournitures de stationnement des hôpitaux pour les patients et les visiteurs; préciser que l’exonération de TPS/TVH visant les fournitures d’un bien — dans le cas où la totalité ou la presque totalité des fournitures du bien par un organisme de bienfaisance sont effectuées gratuitement — ne s’applique pas au stationnement payant; et préciser que le stationnement payant offert par des organismes de bienfaisance établis ou utilisés par des municipalités, universités, collèges publics, écoles ou hôpitaux pour assurer l’exploitation de leurs parcs de stationnement ne donne pas droit à l’exonération spéciale de TPS/TVH qui s’applique au stationnement fourni par des organismes de bienfaisance;
b) préciser que les rapports sur les télévirements internationaux adressés à l’Agence du revenu du Canada peuvent servir aux fins d’administration de la TPS/TVH;
c) apporter des modifications découlant de la mise sur pied du Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale à l’étranger de l’Agence du revenu du Canada;
d) permettre que des renseignements confidentiels relatifs à la TPS/TVH soient fournis à l’organisation de police compétente dans certaines circonstances où les renseignements ont trait à une infraction grave;
e) préciser qu’une personne ne peut demander de crédits de taxe sur les intrants au titre de montants de TPS/TVH qu’elle a déjà recouvrés auprès d’un fournisseur.
La partie 3 met en oeuvre les mesures relatives à l’accise qui ont été proposées dans le budget du 11 février 2014 pour :
a) ajuster le taux sur le marché intérieur du droit d’accise sur les produits du tabac pour tenir compte de l’inflation et abolir le régime de droit d’accise préférentiel applicable aux produits du tabac sur les marchés hors taxes;
b) veiller à la production de déclarations de taxe d’accise exactes par l’ajout d’une pénalité administrative pécuniaire en cas de faux énoncés ou d’omissions et par la modification des dispositions relatives à l’infraction criminelle prévue dans ce cas, en harmonie avec des dispositions similaires de la partie de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise qui porte sur la TPS/TVH;
c) améliorer la capacité de l’Agence du revenu du Canada à fournir des commentaires au Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada.
En outre, elle met en oeuvre d’autres mesures relatives à l’accise pour :
a) permettre que des renseignements confidentiels soient fournis à l’organisation de police compétente dans certaines circonstances où les renseignements ont trait à une infraction grave;
b) apporter des modifications découlant de la mise sur pied du Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale à l’étranger de l’Agence du revenu du Canada.
Enfin, elle modifie la Loi sur le droit pour la sécurité des passagers du transport aérien, la Loi de 2001 sur l’accise et la Loi sur la taxe d’accise afin de préciser que les rapports sur les télévirements internationaux adressés à l’Agence du revenu du Canada peuvent servir aux fins d’application de ces lois.
La partie 4 modifie le Tarif des douanes afin, notamment :
a) de réduire les taux de la nation la plus favorisée et, s’il y a lieu, les taux des autres traitements tarifaires à l’égard des numéros tarifaires relatifs aux unités mobiles de forage au large utilisées à des fins d’exploration et de mise en valeur d’hydrocarbures qui sont importées à compter du 5 mai 2014;
b) d’éliminer l’exonération accordée aux termes du numéro tarifaire 9809.00.00 et d’apporter des modifications corrélatives au numéro tarifaire 9833.00.00 afin que le gouverneur général soit assujetti aux mêmes règles tarifaires que les autres titulaires d’une charge publique;
c) de préciser la classification tarifaire de certains produits alimentaires importés applicable à compter du 29 novembre 2013.
La partie 5 met en oeuvre la Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux et modifie la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu pour y ajouter des exigences corrélatives en matière de déclaration de renseignements.
La partie 6 met en oeuvre diverses mesures, notamment par l’édiction et la modification de plusieurs lois.
La section 1 de la partie 6 prévoit le versement de sommes pour compenser les déductions faites à certaines allocations et prestations dues au titre de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes, de la Loi sur les allocations aux anciens combattants et de la Loi sur les prestations de guerre pour les civils.
La section 2 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur la Banque du Canada et la Loi sur la Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada afin d’autoriser la Banque du Canada à fournir des services bancaires et de dépôt de biens à la Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada.
La section 3 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les produits dangereux afin de mieux encadrer la vente et l’importation de produits dangereux destinés à être utilisés, manutentionnés ou stockés dans des lieux de travail au Canada, conformément à l’initiative sur les produits chimiques dans les lieux de travail décrite dans le Plan d’action conjoint du Conseil de coopération en matière de réglementation. Les modifications mettent notamment en oeuvre le Système général de classification et d’étiquetage des produits chimiques, en ce qui a trait, entre autres, aux exigences relatives aux étiquettes et aux fiches de données de sécurité. Le texte modifie également la loi afin de prévoir des pouvoirs accrus en matière d’exécution et de contrôle d’application. Enfin, il apporte des modifications au Code canadien du travail et à la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses.
La section 4 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur l’importation des boissons enivrantes afin d’autoriser les particuliers à transporter de la bière et des spiritueux d’une province à une autre pour leur consommation personnelle.
La section 5 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les juges afin d’augmenter le nombre des juges de la Cour supérieure du Québec et de la Cour du Banc de la Reine de l’Alberta.
La section 6 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les allocations de retraite des parlementaires afin d’interdire aux parlementaires de cotiser à leur pension ou d’accumuler du service validable à la suite d’une suspension.
La section 7 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur la défense nationale afin de reconnaître les noms historiques de la Marine royale canadienne, de l’Armée canadienne et de l’Aviation royale canadienne tout en préservant l’intégration et l’unification réalisées en vertu de la Loi sur la réorganisation des Forces canadiennes et afin que les désignations de grade et leur cas d’emploi soient fixés par règlement du gouverneur en conseil.
La section 8 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les douanes afin de prolonger à quatre-vingt-dix jours le délai pour présenter une demande de révision d’une saisie, d’une confiscation compensatoire ou d’une pénalité ainsi que de permettre que les demandes de révision et de revendication des tiers puissent être présentées directement au ministre de la Sécurité publique et de la Protection civile.
La section 9 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique pour dissoudre le Conseil de promotion économique du Canada atlantique et abroger l’obligation du président de présenter tous les cinq ans un rapport global d’évaluation des activités de l’Agence et de leurs effets sur les disparités régionales.
La section 10 de la partie 6 prévoit la dissolution de la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton et elle autorise notamment le transfert de ses éléments d’actif et obligations ainsi que de ceux de ses filiales à l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique ou à Sa Majesté du chef du Canada, représentée par le ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux. Elle prévoit en outre que les employés de la Société et de ses filiales sont réputés être nommés en vertu de la Loi sur l’emploi dans la fonction publique et elle comporte des dispositions relatives à leurs conditions d’emploi. Elle modifie la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, notamment pour conférer à l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique les pouvoirs nécessaires pour contrôler et gérer les éléments d’actif et obligations qui lui sont transférés et en disposer. Enfin, elle apporte des modifications corrélatives à d’autres lois et abroge la Loi sur la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton.
La section 11 de la partie 6 prévoit que la responsabilité de l’administration des programmes appelés « Ouvrages de référence en ligne » et « Musée virtuel du Canada » est transférée du ministre du Patrimoine canadien au Musée canadien de l’histoire.
La section 12 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi autorisant l’aliénation de Nordion et de Theratronics afin d’éliminer certaines restrictions applicables à l’acquisition d’actions avec droit de vote de Nordion.
La section 13 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les banques pour y ajouter le pouvoir de réglementer les activités des banques liées aux instruments dérivés et aux indices de référence.
La section 14 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances afin de conférer au gouverneur en conseil des pouvoirs réglementaires élargis en ce qui concerne la transformation de sociétés mutuelles en sociétés avec actions ordinaires.
La section 15 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur la sécurité automobile en vue de favoriser, tout en protégeant les Canadiens, la réalisation des objectifs du Conseil de coopération en matière de réglementation relatifs à l’harmonisation des règlements américains et canadiens. Elle prévoit des mesures qui permettent d’accélérer et de rationaliser le processus réglementaire, de réduire le fardeau administratif des fabricants et des importateurs et d’améliorer la sécurité des Canadiens grâce à des procédures de surveillance révisées et à une disponibilité accrue des renseignements en matière de sécurité automobile.
Cette section abroge des dispositions de la Loi sur la sécurité ferroviaire et de la Loi de 1992 sur le transport des marchandises dangereuses afin de moderniser la législation pour qu’elle tienne compte de la Directive du Cabinet sur la gestion de la réglementation.
Cette section modifie également la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada afin de donner au gouverneur en conseil le pouvoir de prendre des règlements en vue de régir les activités relatives aux fruits et légumes frais, notamment d’exiger que seuls les membres d’une entité ou d’un organisme désignés exercent ces activités. Enfin, elle supprime le Conseil d’arbitrage.
La section 16 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les télécommunications afin de fixer un plafond à la somme qu’une entreprise canadienne peut exiger d’une autre entreprise canadienne pour certains services d’itinérance.
La section 17 de la partie 6 modifie le Code canadien du travail pour permettre aux employés d’interrompre un congé de soignant, un congé en cas de maladie grave d’un enfant ou un congé en cas de décès ou de disparition d’un enfant, afin de prendre un congé de maladie ou un congé lié à un accident de travail ou à une maladie professionnelle. Elle modifie également la Loi sur l’assurance-emploi afin de faciliter l’accès à des prestations de maladie pour les prestataires qui bénéficient de prestations de soignant ou de prestations pour parents d’enfants gravement malades.
La section 18 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments afin d’exempter des exigences prévues à la Loi sur les frais d’utilisation les prix fixés pour la fourniture de services, d’installations ou de produits ou pour l’attribution de droits ou d’avantages par l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments en vertu de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada.
La section 19 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, notamment en vue d’accroître les obligations des institutions financières et des intermédiaires en ce qui concerne la vérification de l’identité des clients, la tenue de documents et l’inscription des personnes et entités qui se livrent au commerce de la monnaie virtuelle et aux entreprises de services monétaires étrangères et pour mentionner les casinos en ligne dans la loi. Elle prévoit des modifications quant aux renseignements que le Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada peut recevoir, recueillir ou communiquer et ajoute des circonstances dans lesquelles le Centre et l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada peuvent les communiquer sous le régime de la loi. Elle met à jour les dispositions de révision et d’appel relatives au programme de déclaration des mouvements transfrontaliers des devises et prévoit l’entrée en vigueur de la Partie 1.1 de la loi.
La section 20 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés et la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 afin, notamment :
a) d’exiger que certaines demandes soient faites électroniquement;
b) de permettre la prise de règlements relatifs à l’établissement d’un régime de sanctions administratives pécuniaires applicable aux cas de non-respect des conditions imposées aux employeurs de travailleurs étrangers;
c) de mettre fin à certaines demandes de résidence permanente n’ayant pas, avant le 11 février 2014, fait l’objet d’une décision quant à la conformité aux critères de sélection;
d) de clarifier et de renforcer les exigences concernant le régime de déclaration d’intérêt.
La section 21 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique afin de clarifier les pouvoirs de l’arbitre, lorsqu’il est déterminé que l’employeur a commis un acte discriminatoire, en lui permettant l’octroi de mesures de redressement systémiques.
En outre, elle clarifie les dispositions transitoires édictées par la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 qui visent les services essentiels.
La section 22 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi de 2006 sur les droits d’exportation de produits de bois d’oeuvre afin de clarifier la façon dont les paiements aux provinces au titre de l’article 99 de cette loi sont calculés.
La section 23 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi d’exécution du budget de 2009 de façon à permettre que soit fixé par loi de crédits le montant total des paiements à des provinces et à des territoires au titre de mesures liées à l’établissement d’un régime canadien de réglementation des valeurs mobilières.
La section 24 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur la protection de l’assurance hypothécaire résidentielle et la Loi nationale sur l’habitation afin de prévoir que certains critères fixés par règlement peuvent s’appliquer à un prêt hypothécaire assuré existant.
La section 25 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les marques de commerce afin notamment de l’harmoniser avec le Traité de Singapour sur le droit des marques et d’y ajouter le pouvoir de prendre des règlements en vue de mettre en oeuvre le Protocole relatif à l’Arrangement de Madrid concernant l’enregistrement international des marques. Les modifications ont entre autres pour objet de simplifier les exigences pour obtenir une date de production relativement à une demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce, d’éliminer l’obligation de déclarer l’emploi de la marque de commerce avant son enregistrement, de réduire de quinze à dix ans la durée de l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce et d’adopter la classification instituée par l’Arrangement de Nice concernant la classification internationale des produits et des services aux fins de l’enregistrement des marques.
La section 26 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur les marques de commerce afin d’abroger le pouvoir de nommer un registraire des marques de commerce et de prévoir que le titulaire du poste de registraire est le commissaire aux brevets nommé en vertu du paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur les brevets.
La section 27 de la partie 6 modifie la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse afin d’empêcher le versement de prestations de la sécurité de la vieillesse fondées sur le revenu pendant toute la durée de l’engagement de parrainage en supprimant le plafond actuel de dix ans.
La section 28 de la partie 6 édicte la Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent et vise la construction et l’exploitation d’un nouveau pont à Montréal pour remplacer le pont Champlain et le pont de l’Île des Soeurs.
La section 29 de la partie 6 édicte la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs, laquelle constitue le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs (SCATA) en tant que secteur de l’administration publique fédérale. Le SCATA devient le seul fournisseur de ressources et de personnel pour 11 tribunaux administratifs. Il fournit à ceux-ci des installations et divers services d’appui, notamment des services de greffe et des services administratifs, de recherche et d’analyse. La section apporte également des modifications corrélatives aux lois constitutives et à d’autres lois relatives à ces tribunaux.
La section 30 de la partie 6 édicte la Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis. Cette loi prévoit une aide financière pour aider les apprentis à défrayer le coût de leur formation. En vertu de cette loi, les apprentis inscrits dans un métier admissible seront admissibles à des prêts exempts d’intérêt jusqu’à ce qu’ils cessent leur formation.







Available on the Parliament of Canada Web Site at the following address:http://www.parl.gc.ca



Disponible sur le site Web du Parlement du Canada à l’adresse suivante :http://www.parl.gc.ca





TABLE OF PROVISIONS



TABLE ANALYTIQUE




AN ACT TO IMPLEMENT CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE BUDGET TABLED IN PARLIAMENT ON FEBRUARY 11, 2014 AND OTHER MEASURES



LOI PORTANT EXÉCUTION DE CERTAINES DISPOSITIONS DU BUDGET DÉPOSÉ AU PARLEMENT LE 11 FÉVRIER 2014 ET METTANT EN OEUVRE D’AUTRES MESURES




SHORT TITLE



TITRE ABRÉGÉ







1.       Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1









1.       Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014







PART 1



PARTIE 1




AMENDMENTS TO THE INCOME TAX ACT AND TO RELATED LEGISLATION



MODIFICATION DE LA LOI DE L’IMPÔT SUR LE REVENU ET DE TEXTES CONNEXES







2–39.       









2-39.       







PART 2



PARTIE 2




AMENDMENTS TO THE EXCISE TAX ACT (GST/HST MEASURES)



MODIFICATION DE LA LOI SUR LA TAXE D’ACCISE (MESURES RELATIVES À LA TPS/TVH)







40–61.       









40-61.       







PART 3



PARTIE 3




AMENDMENTS TO THE EXCISE ACT, 2001, THE EXCISE TAX ACT (OTHER THAN GST/HST MEASURES) AND THE AIR TRAVELLERS SECURITY CHARGE ACT



MODIFICATION DE LA LOI DE 2001 SUR L’ACCISE, DE LA LOI SUR LA TAXE D’ACCISE (SAUF LES DISPOSITIONS CONCERNANT LA TPS/TVH) ET DE LA LOI SUR LE DROIT POUR LA SÉCURITÉ DES PASSAGERS DU TRANSPORT AÉRIEN







62–90.       









62-90.       







PART 4



PARTIE 4




CUSTOMS TARIFF



TARIF DES DOUANES







91–98.       









91-98.       







PART 5



PARTIE 5




CANADA–UNITED STATES ENHANCED TAX INFORMATION EXCHANGE AGREEMENT IMPLEMENTATION ACT



LOI DE MISE EN OEUVRE DE L’ACCORD CANADA–ÉTATS-UNIS POUR UN MEILLEUR ÉCHANGE DE RENSEIGNEMENTS FISCAUX







99.       Enactment of Act









99.       Édiction de la loi







AN ACT TO IMPLEMENT THE CANADA–UNITED STATES ENHANCED TAX INFORMATION EXCHANGE AGREEMENT



LOI METTANT EN OEUVRE L’ACCORD CANADA–ÉTATS-UNIS POUR UN MEILLEUR ÉCHANGE DE RENSEIGNEMENTS FISCAUX







1.       Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act









1.       Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux










2.       Definition of “Agreement”









2.       Définition de « Accord »










3.       Agreement approved









3.       Approbation










4.       Inconsistent laws — general rule









4.       Incompatibilité — principe










5.       Regulations









5.       Règlements










6.       Entry into force of Agreement









6.       Entrée en vigueur de l’Accord










100–101.       









100-101.       







PART 6



PARTIE 6




VARIOUS MEASURES



DIVERSES MESURES




Division 1



Section 1




Payments — Veterans Affairs



Paiements — Anciens Combattants







102–107.       









102-107.       







Division 2



Section 2




Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation



Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada







108–109.       









108-109.       







Division 3



Section 3




Regulatory Cooperation Council Initiative on Workplace Chemicals



Initiative du Conseil de coopération en matière de réglementation concernant les produits chimiques dans les lieux de travail







110–162.       









110-162.       







Division 4



Section 4




Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act



Loi sur l’importation des boissons enivrantes







163.       









163.       







Division 5



Section 5




Judges Act



Loi sur les juges







164–165.       









164-165.       







Division 6



Section 6




Members of Parliament Retiring Allowances Act



Loi sur les allocations de retraite des parlementaires







166–167.       









166-167.       







Division 7



Section 7




National Defence Act



Loi sur la défense nationale







168–171.       









168-171.       







Division 8



Section 8




Customs Act



Loi sur les douanes







172–174.       









172-174.       







Division 9



Section 9




Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency



Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique







175–178.       









175-178.       







Division 10



Section 10




Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation



Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton







179–192.       









179-192.       







Division 11



Section 11




Museums Act



Loi sur les musées







193–205.       









193-205.       







Division 12



Section 12




Nordion and Theratronics Divestiture Authorization Act



Loi autorisant l’aliénation de Nordion et de Theratronics







206–209.       









206-209.       







Division 13



Section 13




Bank Act



Loi sur les banques







210.       









210.       







Division 14



Section 14




Insurance Companies Act



Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances







211.       









211.       







Division 15



Section 15




Regulatory Cooperation



Coopération en matière de réglementation







212–238.       









212-238.       







Division 16



Section 16




Telecommunications Act



Loi sur les télécommunications







239–241.       









239-241.       







Division 17



Section 17




Sickness Benefits



Prestations de maladie







242–251.       









242-251.       







Division 18



Section 18




Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act



Loi sur l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments







252–253.       









252-253.       







Division 19



Section 19




Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing



Recyclage des produits de la criminalité et financement des activités terroristes







254–298.       









254-298.       







Division 20



Section 20




Immigration



Immigration







299–307.       









299-307.       







Division 21



Section 21




Public Service Labour Relations



Relations de travail dans la fonction publique







308–310.       









308-310.       







Division 22



Section 22




Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006



Loi de 2006 sur les droits d’exportation de produits de bois d’oeuvre







311–312.       









311-312.       







Division 23



Section 23




Budget Implementation Act, 2009



Loi d’exécution du budget de 2009







313.       









313.       







Division 24



Section 24




Securitization of Insured Mortgage or Hypothecary Loans



Titrisation de prêts hypothécaires assurés







314–316.       









314-316.       







Division 25



Section 25




Amendments Relating to International Treaties on Trademarks



Modifications liées aux traités internationaux sur les marques de commerce







317–368.       









317-368.       







Division 26



Section 26




Reduction of Governor in Council Appointments



Mesure de réduction des postes pourvus par le gouverneur en conseil







369–370.       









369-370.       







Division 27



Section 27




Old Age Security Act



Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse







371–374.       









371-374.       







Division 28



Section 28




New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act



Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent







375.       Enactment of Act









375.       Édiction de la loi







AN ACT RESPECTING A NEW BRIDGE IN MONTREAL TO REPLACE THE CHAMPLAIN BRIDGE AND THE NUNS’ ISLAND BRIDGE



LOI VISANT UN NOUVEAU PONT À MONTRÉAL POUR REMPLACER LE PONT CHAMPLAIN ET LE PONT DE L’ÎLE DES SOEURS




SHORT TITLE



TITRE ABRÉGÉ







1.       New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act









1.       Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent







INTERPRETATION



DÉFINITIONS







2.       Definitions









2.       Définitions







DESIGNATION



DÉSIGNATION







3.       Power to designate Minister









3.       Désignation du ministre







APPLICATION



APPLICATION







4.       Role of Minister









4.       Rôle du ministre










5.       Declaration









5.       Déclaration










6.       Exemption — Bridges Act









6.       Exemption — Loi sur les ponts







AGREEMENTS



ENTENTES







7.       Minister of Public Works and Government Services









7.       Ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux










8.       Implementation









8.       Ministre







TOLLS, FEES OR OTHER CHARGES



DROITS







9.       Payment









9.       Paiement










10.       Charges recoverable









10.       Droits recouvrables







ORDER IN COUNCIL



DÉCRET







11.       Other exemptions









11.       Autres exemptions







REGULATIONS



RÈGLEMENTS







12.       Ministerial regulations









12.       Règlements ministériels







Division 29



Section 29




Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act



Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs







376.       Enactment of Act









376.       Édiction de la loi







AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS SUPPORT SERVICE OF CANADA



LOI PORTANT CRÉATION DU SERVICE CANADIEN D’APPUI AUX TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS




SHORT TITLE



TITRE ABRÉGÉ







1.       Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act









1.       Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs







INTERPRETATION



DÉFINITIONS







2.       Definitions









2.       Définitions







ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS SUPPORT SERVICE OF CANADA



SERVICE CANADIEN D’APPUI AUX TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS







3.       Establishment of Service









3.       Constitution










4.       Principal office









4.       Siège







CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR



ADMINISTRATEUR EN CHEF







5.       Appointment









5.       Nomination










6.       Status of Chief Administrator









6.       Rang










7.       Absence or incapacity









7.       Absence ou empêchement










8.       Salary and expenses









8.       Traitement et frais










9.       Chief executive officer









9.       Premier dirigeant










10.       Responsibility









10.       Fonctions










11.       General powers









11.       Pouvoirs généraux










12.       Limitation









12.       Restriction










13.       Delegation









13.       Délégation







ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL CHAIRPERSONS



PRÉSIDENTS DES TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS







14.       For greater certainty









14.       Précision







EMPLOYEES OF THE SERVICE



PERSONNEL







15.       Appointment of employees









15.       Nomination







GENERAL



DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES







16.       Deeming — filing documents and giving notice









16.       Présomption : dépôt de documents et fourniture d’avis










17.       Deeming — amounts payable









17.       Présomption : versement de sommes










18.       Amounts for operation of administrative tribunal









18.       Sommes versées pour le fonctionnement du tribunal administratif










377–482.       









377-482.       







Division 30



Section 30




Apprentice Loans Act



Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis







483.       Enactment of Act









483.       Édiction de la loi







AN ACT RESPECTING THE MAKING OF LOANS TO APPRENTICES



LOI PORTANT OCTROI DE PRÊTS AUX APPRENTIS




SHORT TITLE



TITRE ABRÉGÉ







1.       Apprentice Loans Act









1.       Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis







INTERPRETATION



DÉFINITIONS







2.       Definitions









2.       Définitions







PURPOSE



OBJET DE LA LOI







3.       Purpose









3.       Objet







APPRENTICE LOANS



PRÊTS AUX APPRENTIS







4.       Agreements with eligible apprentices









4.       Accord avec un apprenti admissible










5.       Agreements or arrangements with service providers









5.       Accord ou arrangement avec un fournisseur de services










6.       Suspension or denial of apprentice loans









6.       Refus ou suspension de prêts aux apprentis







SPECIAL PAYMENTS



PAIEMENTS SPÉCIAUX







7.       Special payments









7.       Paiements spéciaux







INTEREST-FREE AND DEFERRAL PERIODS



PÉRIODES SANS INTÉRÊT NI REMBOURSEMENT







8.       Interest-free period









8.       Exemption de paiement







DEATH OR DISABILITY OF BORROWER



DÉCÈS OU INVALIDITÉ DE L’EMPRUNTEUR







9.       Death of borrower









9.       Cas de décès










10.       Severe permanent disability









10.       Invalidité grave et permanente







MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF OUTSTANDING APPRENTICE LOANS



MAXIMUM ADMISSIBLE DES PRÊTS AUX APPRENTIS IMPAYÉS







11.       Maximum amount









11.       Maximum admissible







REGULATIONS



RÈGLEMENTS







12.       Regulations









12.       Règlements







GENERAL



DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES







13.       Forms and documents









13.       Formulaires et autres documents










14.       Right of recovery by Minister









14.       Droit de recouvrement par le ministre










15.       Waiver









15.       Renonciation










16.       Apprentice loan denied due to error









16.       Refus d’un prêt aux apprentis en raison d’une erreur










17.       Limitation or prescription period









17.       Prescription










18.       Requirement to provide information or documents









18.       Fourniture de renseignements ou production de documents










19.       False statement or information









19.       Fausses déclarations










20.       Administrative measures









20.       Mesures administratives










21.       Authority to enter into agreements and arrangements









21.       Pouvoir de conclure des arrangements ou accords










22.       Payment out of C.R.F.









22.       Paiements sur le Trésor










484–486.       









484-486.       







SCHEDULE 1



ANNEXE 1




SCHEDULE 2



ANNEXE 2




SCHEDULE 3



ANNEXE 3




SCHEDULE 4



ANNEXE 4




SCHEDULE 5



ANNEXE 5




SCHEDULE 6



ANNEXE 6



			.vis1 {position: absolute;display:block;}
			.vis2 {position: static;}
		








62-63 ELIZABETH II









62-63 ELIZABETH II














——————









——————














CHAPTER 20









CHAPITRE 20














An Act to implement certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on February 11, 2014 and other measures









Loi portant exécution de certaines dispositions du budget déposé au Parlement le 11 février 2014 et mettant en oeuvre d’autres mesures














[Assented to 19th June, 2014]









[Sanctionnée le 19 juin 2014]














Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:









Sa Majesté, sur l’avis et avec le consentement du Sénat et de la Chambre des communes du Canada, édicte :












SHORT TITLE









TITRE ABRÉGÉ












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









1. Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Titre abrégé












PART 1









PARTIE 1












AMENDMENTS TO THE INCOME TAX ACT AND TO RELATED LEGISLATION









MODIFICATION DE LA LOI DE L’IMPÔT SUR LE REVENU ET DE TEXTES CONNEXES










R.S., c. 1 (5th Supp.)



Income Tax Act









Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu



L.R., ch. 1 (5e suppl.)












2. Subsection 56(1) of the Income Tax Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (z.2), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (z.3) and by adding the following after paragraph (z.3):









2. Le paragraphe 56(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa z.3), de ce qui suit :












Tax informant program



(z.4) any amount received in the year by the taxpayer under a contract, to provide information to the Canada Revenue Agency, entered into by the taxpayer under a program administered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compliance.









z.4) toute somme que le contribuable reçoit au cours de l’année aux termes d’un contrat pour la fourniture de renseignements à l’Agence du revenu du Canada qu’il a conclu dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale.



Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale












3. Section 60 of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (y), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (z) and by adding the following after paragraph (z):









3. L’article 60 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa z), de ce qui suit :












Tax informant program



(z.1) the total of all amounts each of which is an amount paid in the year as a repayment of an amount that was included, because of paragraph 56(1)(z.4), in computing the taxpayer’s income for the year or a preceding taxation year.









z.1) le total des sommes dont chacune représente une somme versée au cours de l’année en remboursement d’une somme incluse par l’effet de l’alinéa 56(1)z.4) dans le calcul du revenu du contribuable pour l’année ou pour une année d’imposition antérieure.



Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale












4. (1) The portion of subsection 81(4) of the Act after subparagraph (b)(ii) is replaced by the following:









4. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 81(4) de la même loi suivant le sous-alinéa b)(ii) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














there shall not be included in computing the individual’s income derived from the perform-ance of those duties the lesser of $1,000 and the total of those amounts, unless the individual makes a claim under section 118.06 or 118.07 for the year.









Le présent paragraphe ne s’applique pas si le particulier demande pour l’année la déduction prévue aux articles 118.06 ou 118.07.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














5. (1) The portion of subparagraph 110.1(1)(d)(iii) of the Act before clause (A) is replaced by the following:









5. (1) Le passage du sous-alinéa 110.1(1)d)(iii) de la même loi précédant la division (A) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(iii) the gift was made by the corporation in the year or in any of the 10 preceding taxation years to









(iii) le don a été fait par la société au cours de l’année ou des dix années d’imposition précédentes à l’une des personnes suivantes :














(2) Subsection (1) applies to gifts made after February 10, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux dons faits après le 10 février 2014.














6. (1) Paragraph (a) of the description of B in subsection 118.01(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









6. (1) L’alinéa a) de l’élément B de la formule figurant au paragraphe 118.01(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) $15,000, and









a) 15 000 $,














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














(3) Subsection 117.1(1) of the Act does not apply in respect of subsection 118.01(2) of the Act for the 2014 taxation year.









(3) Le paragraphe 117.1(1) de la même loi ne s’applique pas relativement au paragraphe 118.01(2) de la même loi pour l’année d’imposition 2014.














7. (1) Subsections 118.06(1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:









7. (1) Les paragraphes 118.06(1) et (2) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Definition of “eligible volunteer firefighting services”



118.06 (1) In this section and section 118.07, “eligible volunteer firefighting services” means services provided by an individual in the individual’s capacity as a volunteer firefighter to a fire department that consist primarily of responding to and being on call for firefighting and related emergency calls, attending meetings held by the fire department and participating in required training related to the prevention or suppression of fires, but does not include services provided to a particular fire department if the individual provides firefighting services to the department otherwise than as a volunteer.









118.06 (1) Au présent article et à l’article 118.07, « services admissibles de pompier volontaire » s’entend des services fournis par un particulier en sa qualité de pompier volontaire auprès d’un service d’incendie, qui consistent principalement à intervenir et à être de permanence en cas d’incendie ou de situations d’urgence connexes, à assister à des réunions tenues par le service d’incendie et à participer aux activités de formation indispensable liées à la prévention ou à l’extinction d’incendies. En sont exclus les services de lutte contre les incendies fournis à un service d’incendie autrement qu’à titre de volontaire.



Définition de « services admissibles de pompier volontaire »










Volunteer firefighter tax credit



(2) For the purpose of computing the tax payable under this Part for a taxation year by an individual who performs eligible volunteer firefighting services in the year, there may be deducted the amount determined by multiplying $3,000 by the appropriate percentage for the taxation year if the individual








(a) performs in the year not less than 200 hours of service each of which is an hour of








(i) eligible volunteer firefighting service for a fire department, or








(ii) eligible search and rescue volunteer service for an eligible search and rescue organization; and








(b) provides the certificates referred to in subsections (3) and 118.07(3) as and when requested by the Minister.









(2) Est déductible dans le calcul de l’impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour une année d’imposition par un particulier qui fournit des services admissibles de pompier volontaire au cours de l’année le produit de 3 000 $ par le taux de base pour l’année si le particulier, à la fois :



Crédit d’impôt pour les pompiers volontaires




a) effectue au cours de l’année au moins deux cents heures de service dont chacune représente :








(i) une heure de services admissibles de pompier volontaire auprès d’un service d’incendie,








(ii) une heure de services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage auprès d’un organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage;








b) fournit, conformément à la demande du ministre, les certificats visés aux paragraphes (3) et 118.07(3).
















(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














8. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 118.06:









8. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 118.06, de ce qui suit :












Definitions



118.07 (1) The following definitions apply in this section and section 118.06.




“eligible search and rescue organization”« organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage »



“eligible search and rescue organization” means a search and rescue organization








(a) that is a member of the Search and Rescue Volunteer Association of Canada, the Civil Air Search and Rescue Association or the Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary; or








(b) whose status as a search and rescue organization is recognized by a provincial, municipal or public authority.




“eligible search and rescue volunteer services”« services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage »



“eligible search and rescue volunteer services” means services, other than eligible volunteer firefighting services, provided by an individual in the individual’s capacity as a volunteer to an eligible search and rescue organization that consist primarily of responding to and being on call for search and rescue and related emergency calls, attending meetings held by the organization and participating in required training related to search and rescue services, but does not include services provided to an organization if the individual provides search and rescue services to the organization otherwise than as a volunteer.









118.07 (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent article et à l’article 118.06.



Définitions




« organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage » Organisme de recherche et sauvetage à l’égard duquel l’un des énoncés ci-après se vérifie :



« organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage »“eligible search and rescue organization”




a) il est membre de l’Association canadienne des volontaires en recherche et sauvetage, de l’Association civile de recherche et de sauvetage aériens ou de la Garde côtière auxiliaire canadienne;








b) son statut d’organisme de recherche et sauvetage est reconnu par une autorité provinciale, municipale ou publique.








« services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage » Services, sauf les services admissibles de pompier volontaire, fournis par un particulier en sa qualité de volontaire auprès d’un organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage, qui consistent principalement à intervenir et à être de permanence en cas de situations de recherche et sauvetage ou de situations d’urgence connexes, à assister à des réunions tenues par l’organisme et à participer aux activités de formation indispensable liées à la prestation de services de recherche et sauvetage. En sont exclus les services de recherche et sauvetage fournis à un organisme autrement qu’à titre de volontaire.



« services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage »“eligible search and rescue volunteer services”










Search and rescue volunteer tax credit



(2) For the purpose of computing the tax payable under this Part for a taxation year by an individual who performs eligible search and rescue volunteer services in the year, there may be deducted the amount determined by multiplying $3,000 by the appropriate percentage for the taxation year if the individual








(a) performs in the year not less than 200 hours of service each of which is an hour of








(i) eligible search and rescue volunteer service for an eligible search and rescue organization, or








(ii) eligible volunteer firefighting services for a fire department;








(b) provides the certificates referred to in subsections (3) and 118.06(3) as and when requested by the Minister; and








(c) has not deducted an amount under section 118.06 for the year.









(2) Est déductible dans le calcul de l’impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour une année d’imposition par un particulier qui fournit des services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage au cours de l’année le produit de 3 000 $ par le taux de base pour l’année si le particulier, à la fois :



Crédit d’impôt pour les volontaires en recherche et sauvetage




a) effectue au cours de l’année au moins deux cents heures de service dont chacune représente :








(i) une heure de services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage auprès d’un organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage,








(ii) une heure de services admissibles de pompier volontaire auprès d’un service d’incendie;








b) fournit, conformément à la demande du ministre, les certificats visés aux paragraphes (3) et 118.06(3);








c) n’a pas déduit de somme en application de l’article 118.06 pour l’année.














Certificate



(3) If the Minister so demands, an individual making a claim under this section in respect of a taxation year shall provide to the Minister a written certificate from the team president, or other individual who fulfils a similar role, of each eligible search and rescue organization to which the individual provided eligible search and rescue volunteer services for the year, attesting to the number of hours of eligible search and rescue volunteer services performed in the year by the individual for the particular organization.









(3) Sur demande du ministre, le particulier qui demande pour une année d’imposition la déduction prévue au présent article doit fournir au ministre un certificat écrit, provenant du dirigeant d’équipe, ou d’un autre particulier qui remplit un rôle semblable, de chaque organisme admissible de recherche et sauvetage auquel il a fourni des services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage pour l’année, attestant le nombre d’heures de services admissibles de volontaire en recherche et sauvetage qu’il a effectuées au cours de l’année pour l’organisme en cause.



Certificat












(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














9. (1) The portion of paragraph (c) of the definition “total ecological gifts” in subsection 118.1(1) of the Act before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









9. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa c) de la définition de « total des dons de biens écosensibles » précédant le sous-alinéa (i), au paragraphe 118.1(1) de la même loi, est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(c) the gift was made by the individual in the year or in any of the 10 preceding taxation years to









c) le don a été fait par le particulier au cours de l’année ou d’une des dix années d’imposition précédentes à l’une des personnes suivantes :














(2) Subsection (1) applies to gifts made after February 10, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux dons faits après le 10 février 2014.














10. (1) The portion of paragraph 118.2(2)(l) of the Act before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









10. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa 118.2(2)l) de la même loi précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(l) on behalf of the patient who is blind or profoundly deaf or has severe autism, severe diabetes, severe epilepsy or a severe and prolonged impairment that markedly restricts the use of the patient’s arms or legs,









l) au nom du particulier, de son époux ou conjoint de fait ou d’une personne à charge visée à l’alinéa a), qui est atteint d’autisme grave, de cécité, de diabète grave, d’épilepsie grave ou de surdité profonde ou qui a une déficience grave et prolongée qui limite de façon marquée l’usage des bras ou des jambes :














(2) Subsection 118.2(2) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (l.91):









(2) Le paragraphe 118.2(2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa l.91), de ce qui suit :














(l.92) as remuneration for the design of an individualized therapy plan for the patient because of the patient’s severe and prolonged impairment, if






(i) because of the patient’s impairment, an amount would be, if this Act were read without reference to paragraph 118.3(1)(c), deductible under section 118.3 in computing a taxpayer’s tax payable under this Part for the taxation year in which the remuneration is paid,






(ii) the plan is required to access public funding for specialized therapy or is prescribed by






(A) a medical doctor or a psychologist, in the case of mental impairment, or






(B) a medical doctor or an occupational therapist, in the case of a physical impairment,






(iii) the therapy set out in the plan is prescribed by and, if undertaken, administered under the general supervision of






(A) a medical doctor or a psychologist, in the case of mental impairment, or






(B) a medical doctor or an occupational therapist, in the case of a physical impairment, and






(iv) the payment is made to a person ordinarily engaged in a business that includes the design of such plans for individuals who are not related to the payee;









l.92) à titre de rémunération pour la conception d’un plan de traitement personnalisé pour le particulier, son époux ou conjoint de fait ou une personne à charge visée à l’alinéa a) en raison de sa déficience grave et prolongée, si les conditions ci-après sont réunies :






(i) en raison de la déficience du particulier, de l’époux ou du conjoint de fait ou de la personne à charge, une somme serait déductible en application de l’article 118.3 dans le calcul de l’impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie par un contribuable pour l’année d’imposition au cours de laquelle la rémunération est payée si la présente loi s’appliquait compte non tenu de l’alinéa 118.3(1)c),






(ii) le plan est requis pour l’accès au financement public d’un traitement spécialisé ou est prescrit par :






(A) un médecin en titre ou un psychologue, dans le cas d’une déficience mentale,






(B) un médecin en titre ou un ergothérapeute, dans le cas d’une déficience physique,






(iii) le traitement prévu par le plan est prescrit par l’une des personnes ci-après et, s’il est mis en oeuvre, est administré sous sa surveillance générale :






(A) un médecin en titre ou un psychologue, dans le cas d’une déficience mentale,






(B) un médecin en titre ou un ergothérapeute, dans le cas d’une déficience physique,






(iv) le bénéficiaire du paiement est une personne dont l’entreprise habituelle comprend la conception de tels plans à l’intention de particuliers auxquels elle n’est pas liée;














(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply in respect of expenses incurred after 2013.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent relativement aux dépenses engagées après 2013.














11. (1) Paragraph 118.3(2)(d) of the Act is replaced by the following:









11. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 118.3(2) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(d) the amount of that person’s tax payable under this Part for the year computed before any deductions under this Division (other than under sections 118 to 118.07 and 118.7).









(2) L’excédent du montant déductible en application du paragraphe (1) dans le calcul de l’impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour une année d’imposition par une personne (sauf une personne à l’égard de laquelle l’époux ou le conjoint de fait déduit un montant pour l’année en application des articles 118 ou 118.8) qui réside au Canada à un moment donné de l’année et qui a le droit de déduire un montant pour l’année en application du paragraphe (1) sur l’impôt payable par cette personne en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année calculé avant toute déduction en application de la présente section — à l’exception des articles 118 à 118.07 et 118.7 — est déductible dans le calcul de l’impôt payable par un particulier en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année dans le cas où :














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














12. (1) The description of C in subsection 118.61(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









12. (1) L’élément C de la formule figurant au paragraphe 118.61(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














C      is the lesser of the value of B and the amount that would be the individual’s tax payable under this Part for the year if no amount were deductible under this Division (other than an amount deductible under this section and any of sections 118 to 118.07, 118.3 and 118.7);









C      la valeur de l’élément B ou, si elle est inférieure, la somme qui correspondrait à l’impôt payable par le particulier en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année si aucune somme, sauf celles visées au présent article ou à l’un des articles 118 à 118.07, 118.3 et 118.7, n’était déductible en application de la présente section;














(2) Paragraph 118.61(2)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 118.61(2)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) the amount that would be the individual’s tax payable under this Part for the year if no amount were deductible under this Division (other than an amount deductible under this section and any of sections 118 to 118.07, 118.3 and 118.7).









b) la somme qui correspondrait à son impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année si aucune somme, sauf celles visées au présent article ou à l’un des articles 118 à 118.07, 118.3 et 118.7, n’était déductible en application de la présente section.














(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














13. (1) Paragraph (a) of the description of C in section 118.8 of the Act is replaced by the following:









13. (1) L’alinéa a) de l’élément C de la formule figurant à l’article 118.8 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) the amount that would be the spouse’s or common-law partner’s tax payable under this Part for the year if no amount were deductible under this Division (other than an amount deductible under subsection 118(1) because of paragraph (c) of the description of B in that subsection, under subsection 118(10) or under any of sections 118.01 to 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 and 118.7)









a)      le montant qui représenterait l’impôt payable par l’époux ou le conjoint de fait en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année si aucune somme, sauf celles visées à l’alinéa 118(1)c), au paragraphe 118(10) ou à l’un des articles 118.01 à 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 et 118.7, n’était déductible en application de la présente section,














(2) Subparagraph (b)(ii) of the description of C in section 118.8 of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le sous-alinéa b)(ii) de l’élément C de la formule figurant à l’article 118.8 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(ii) the amount that would be the spouse’s or common-law partner’s tax payable under this Part for the year if no amount were deductible under this Division (other than an amount deductible under any of sections 118 to 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 and 118.7).









(ii) le montant qui représenterait l’impôt payable par l’époux ou le conjoint de fait en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année si aucune somme, sauf celles visées à l’un des articles 118 à 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 et 118.7, n’était déductible en application de la présente section.














(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














14. (1) The description of B in paragraph 118.81(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









14. (1) L’élément B de la formule figurant à l’alinéa 118.81a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














B      is the amount that would be the person’s tax payable under this Part for the year if no amount were deductible under this Division (other than an amount deductible under any of sections 118 to 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 and 118.7), and









B      la somme qui correspondrait à l’impôt payable par la personne en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année si aucune somme, sauf celles visées à l’un des articles 118 à 118.07, 118.3, 118.61 et 118.7, n’était déductible en application de la présente section;














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














15. (1) Section 118.92 of the Act is replaced by the following:









15. (1) L’article 118.92 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Ordering of credits



118.92 In computing an individual’s tax payable under this Part, the following provisions shall be applied in the following order: subsections 118(1) and (2), section 118.7, subsections 118(3) and (10) and sections 118.01, 118.02, 118.03, 118.031, 118.04, 118.05, 118.06, 118.07, 118.3, 118.61, 118.5, 118.6, 118.9, 118.8, 118.2, 118.1, 118.62 and 121.









118.92 Pour le calcul de l’impôt payable par un particulier en vertu de la présente partie, les dispositions ci-après sont appliquées dans l’ordre suivant : paragraphes 118(1) et (2), article 118.7, paragraphes 118(3) et (10) et articles 118.01, 118.02, 118.03, 118.031, 118.04, 118.05, 118.06, 118.07, 118.3, 118.61, 118.5, 118.6, 118.9, 118.8, 118.2, 118.1, 118.62 et 121.



Ordre d’application des crédits












(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














16. (1) Section 118.94 of the Act is replaced by the following:









16. (1) L’article 118.94 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Tax payable by non-residents (credits restricted)



118.94 Sections 118 to 118.07 and 118.2, subsections 118.3(2) and (3) and sections 118.6, 118.8 and 118.9 do not apply for the purpose of computing the tax payable under this Part for a taxation year by an individual who at no time in the year is resident in Canada unless all or substantially all the individual’s income for the year is included in computing the individual’s taxable income earned in Canada for the year.









118.94 Les articles 118 à 118.07 et 118.2, les paragraphes 118.3(2) et (3) et les articles 118.6, 118.8 et 118.9 ne s’appliquent pas au calcul de l’impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour une année d’imposition par un particulier qui ne réside au Canada à aucun moment de l’année, sauf si la totalité ou la presque totalité de son revenu pour l’année est incluse dans le calcul de son revenu imposable gagné au Canada pour l’année.



Impôt payable par les non-résidents












(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














17. (1) The portion of subsection 122.5(3) of the Act before the formula is replaced by the following:









17. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 122.5(3) de la même loi précédant la formule est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Deemed payment on account of tax



(3) An eligible individual in relation to a month specified for a taxation year who files a return of income for the taxation year is deemed to have paid during the specified month on account of their tax payable under this Part for the taxation year an amount equal to ¼ of the amount, if any, determined by the formula









(3) Le particulier admissible par rapport à un mois déterminé d’une année d’imposition qui produit une déclaration de revenu pour l’année est réputé avoir payé au cours de ce mois, au titre de son impôt payable en vertu de la présente partie pour l’année, un montant égal au quart du montant obtenu par la formule suivante :



Montant réputé versé au titre de l’impôt












(2) Subsection 122.5(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 122.5(5) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Only one eligible individual



(5) If an individual is a qualified relation of another individual in relation to a month specified for a taxation year and both those individuals would be, but for this subsection, eligible individuals in relation to the specified month, only the individual that the Minister designates is the eligible individual in relation to the specified month.









(5) Si un particulier est le proche admissible d’un autre particulier par rapport à un mois déterminé d’une année d’imposition et que les deux particuliers seraient, en l’absence du présent paragraphe, des particuliers admissibles par rapport à ce mois, seul le particulier désigné par le ministre est le particulier admissible par rapport à ce mois.



Un seul particulier admissible












(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














18. (1) Paragraph (a) of the definition “flow-through mining expenditure” in subsection 127(9) of the Act is replaced by the following:









18. (1) L’alinéa a) de la définition de « dépense minière déterminée », au paragraphe 127(9) de la même loi, est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) that is a Canadian exploration expense incurred by a corporation after March 2014 and before 2016 (including, for greater certainty, an expense that is deemed by subsection 66(12.66) to be incurred before 2016) in conducting mining exploration activity from or above the surface of the earth for the purpose of determining the existence, location, extent or quality of a mineral resource described in paragraph (a) or (d) of the definition “mineral resource” in subsection 248(1),









a) elle représente des frais d’exploration au Canada engagés par une société après mars 2014 et avant 2016 (étant entendu que ces frais comprennent ceux qui sont réputés par le paragraphe 66(12.66) être engagés avant 2016) dans le cadre d’activités d’exploration minière effectuées à partir ou au-dessus de la surface terrestre en vue de déterminer l’existence, la localisation, l’étendue ou la qualité de matières minérales visées aux alinéas a) ou d) de la définition de « matières minérales » au paragraphe 248(1);














(2) Paragraphs (c) and (d) of the definition “flow-through mining expenditure” in subsection 127(9) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les alinéas c) et d) de la définition de « dépense minière déterminée », au paragraphe 127(9) de la même loi, sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














(c) an amount in respect of which is renounced in accordance with subsection 66(12.6) by the corporation to the taxpayer (or a partnership of which the taxpayer is a member) under an agreement described in that subsection and made after March 2014 and before April 2015, and






(d) that is not an expense that was renounced under subsection 66(12.6) to the corporation (or a partnership of which the corporation is a member), unless that renunciation was under an agreement described in that subsection and made after March 2014 and before April 2015;









c) elle fait l’objet d’une renonciation conformément au paragraphe 66(12.6) par la société en faveur du contribuable (ou d’une société de personnes dont il est un associé) aux termes d’une convention mentionnée à ce paragraphe conclue après mars 2014 et avant avril 2015;






d) elle n’est pas une dépense à laquelle il a été renoncé en application du paragraphe 66(12.6) en faveur de la société (ou d’une société de personnes dont elle est un associé), sauf si la renonciation a été effectuée aux termes d’une convention mentionnée à ce paragraphe conclue après mars 2014 et avant avril 2015.














(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to expenses renounced under a flow-through share agreement entered into after March 2014.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent aux dépenses auxquelles il est renoncé aux termes d’une convention d’émission d’actions accréditives conclue après mars 2014.














19. (1) Paragraph 127.531(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









19. (1) L’alinéa 127.531a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) an amount deducted under any of subsections 118(1), (2) and (10), sections 118.01 to 118.07, subsection 118.3(1), sections 118.5 to 118.7 and 119 and subsection 127(1) in computing the individual’s tax payable for the year under this Part; or









a) la somme déduite, en application des paragraphes 118(1), (2) ou (10), de l’un des articles 118.01 à 118.07, du paragraphe 118.3(1), de l’un des articles 118.5 à 118.7 et 119 ou du paragraphe 127(1), dans le calcul de l’impôt payable par le particulier pour l’année en vertu de la présente partie;














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














20. (1) Clause 128(2)(e)(iii)(A) of the Act is replaced by the following:









20. (1) La division 128(2)e)(iii)(A) de la même loi est remplacée par ce qui suit :














(A) under any of sections 118 to 118.07, 118.2, 118.3, 118.5, 118.6, 118.8 and 118.9,









(A) de l’un des articles 118 à 118.07, 118.2, 118.3, 118.5, 118.6, 118.8 et 118.9,














(2) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














21. (1) Subsection 149.1(4.1) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (d), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (e) and by adding the following after paragraph (e):









21. (1) Le paragraphe 149.1(4.1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :














(f) of a registered charity, if it accepts a gift from a foreign state, as defined in section 2 of the State Immunity Act, that is set out on the list referred to in subsection 6.1(2) of that Act.









f) de tout organisme de bienfaisance enregistré qui accepte un don d’un État étranger, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur l’immunité des États, qui est inscrit sur la liste mentionnée au paragraphe 6.1(2) de cette loi.














(2) Subsection 149.1(4.2) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (b), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the following after paragraph (c):









(2) Le paragraphe 149.1(4.2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa c), de ce qui suit :














(d) if the association accepts a gift from a foreign state, as defined in section 2 of the State Immunity Act, that is set out on the list referred to in subsection 6.1(2) of that Act.









d) si l’association accepte un don d’un État étranger, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur l’immunité des États, qui est inscrit sur la liste mentionnée au paragraphe 6.1(2) de cette loi.














(3) Subsection 149.1(25) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (a), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the following after paragraph (b):









(3) Le paragraphe 149.1(25) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa b), de ce qui suit :














(c) the charity or association has accepted a gift from a foreign state, as defined in section 2 of the State Immunity Act, that is set out on the list referred to in subsection 6.1(2) of that Act.









c) l’organisme ou l’association a accepté un don d’un État étranger, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur l’immunité des États, qui est inscrit sur la liste mentionnée au paragraphe 6.1(2) de cette loi.














(4) Subsections (1) to (3) apply in respect of gifts accepted after February 10, 2014.









(4) Les paragraphes (1) à (3) s’appliquent relativement aux dons acceptés après le 10 février 2014.














22. (1) Subsection 152(1.2) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (b), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the following after paragraph (c):









22. (1) Le paragraphe 152(1.2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa c), de ce qui suit :














(d) if the Minister determines the amount deemed by subsection 122.5(3) to have been paid by an individual for a taxation year to be nil, subsection (2) does not apply to the determination unless the individual requests a notice of determination from the Minister.









d) si le ministre établit que le montant qui est réputé, en vertu du paragraphe 122.5(3), avoir été payé par un particulier pour une année d’imposition est nul, le paragraphe (2) ne s’applique pas à la décision, à moins que le particulier ne demande un avis de décision au ministre.














(2) Subsection 152(10) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 152(10) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Tax deemed not assessed



(10) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an amount of tax is deemed, for the purpose of any agreement entered into by or on behalf of the Government of Canada under section 7 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act, not to have been assessed under this Act until








(a) the end of the period during which the security is accepted by the Minister, if adequate security for the tax is accepted by the Minister under subsection 220(4.5) or (4.6); or








(b) the amount is collected by the Minister, if information relevant to the assessment of the amount was provided to the Canada Revenue Agency under a contract entered into by a person under a program administered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compliance.









(10) Malgré les autres dispositions du présent article, un montant d’impôt est réputé, pour l’application de tout accord conclu par le gouvernement du Canada, ou pour son compte, en vertu de l’article 7 de la Loi sur les arrangements fiscaux entre le gouvernement fédéral et les provinces, ne pas avoir fait l’objet d’une cotisation en vertu de la présente loi jusqu’à ce que, selon le cas :



Cotisation réputée ne pas avoir été établie




a) la période au cours de laquelle la garantie est acceptée par le ministre prenne fin, dans le cas où une garantie suffisante pour l’impôt est acceptée par le ministre aux termes des paragraphes 220(4.5) ou (4.6);








b) le montant soit perçu par le ministre, dans le cas où des renseignements relatifs à la cotisation établie à l’égard du montant ont été fournis à l’Agence du revenu du Canada aux termes d’un contrat conclu par une personne dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale.
















(3) Subsection (1) applies to the 2014 and subsequent taxation years.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition 2014 et suivantes.














23. Paragraph 153(1)(s) of the Act is replaced by the following:









23. L’alinéa 153(1)s) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(s) an amount described in paragraph 56(1)(r), (z.2) or (z.4), or









s) une somme visée aux alinéas 56(1)r), z.2) ou z.4);














24. (1) The portion of subsection 204.81(8.3) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









24. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 204.81(8.3) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Transitional rules



(8.3) If a registered labour-sponsored venture capital corporation notifies the Minister in writing of its intent to revoke its registration under this Part, the following rules apply:









(8.3) Si une société agréée à capital de risque de travailleurs avise le ministre par écrit de son intention de faire retirer son agrément en vertu de la présente partie, les règles ci-après s’appliquent :



Règles transitoires












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on November 27, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 27 novembre 2013.














25. (1) Paragraph 204.85(3)(d) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (iv), by adding “or” at the end of subparagraph (v) and by adding the following after subparagraph (v):









25. (1) L’alinéa 204.85(3)d) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le sous-alinéa (v), de ce qui suit :














(vi) immediately before the amalgamation or merger, one or more of the predecessor corporations is a corporation that has given notification under subsection 204.81(8.3) and one or more of the predecessor corporations is a registered labour-sponsored venture capital corporation that has not given notification under that subsection;









(vi) immédiatement avant la fusion ou l’unification, au moins une des sociétés remplacées est une société qui a donné l’avis visé au paragraphe 204.81(8.3) et au moins une des sociétés remplacées est une société agréée à capital de risque de travailleurs qui n’a pas donné cet avis;














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on November 27, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 27 novembre 2013.














26. Subsection 212(1) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (v), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (w) and by adding the following after paragraph (w):









26. Le paragraphe 212(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa w), de ce qui suit :












Tax informant program



(x) a payment of an amount described in paragraph 56(1)(z.4).









x) du paiement d’une somme visée à l’alinéa 56(1)z.4).



Programme de dénonciateurs de l’inobservation fiscale












27. The portion of subsection 238(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









27. Le passage du paragraphe 238(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Offences and punishment



238. (1) Every person who has failed to file or make a return as and when required by or under this Act or a regulation or who has failed to comply with subsection 116(3), 127(3.1) or (3.2), 147.1(7) or 153(1), any of sections 230 to 232, 244.7 and 267 or a regulation made under subsection 147.1(18) or with an order made under subsection (2) is guilty of an offence and, in addition to any penalty otherwise provided, is liable on summary conviction to









238. (1) Toute personne qui omet de produire, de présenter ou de remplir une déclaration de la manière et dans le délai prévus par la présente loi ou par une disposition réglementaire, qui contrevient aux paragraphes 116(3), 127(3.1) ou (3.2), 147.1(7) ou 153(1), à l’un des articles 230 à 232, 244.7 et 267 ou à une disposition réglementaire prise en vertu du paragraphe 147.1(18) ou qui contrevient à une ordonnance rendue en application du paragraphe (2) commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire et outre toute pénalité prévue par ailleurs :



Infractions et peines












28. (1) Paragraph 241(4)(d) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (xiii), by adding “or” at the end of subparagraph (xiv) and by adding the following after subparagraph (xiv):









28. (1) L’alinéa 241(4)d) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le sous-alinéa (xiv), de ce qui suit :














(xv) to an official of the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada solely for the purpose of enabling the Centre to evaluate the usefulness of information provided by the Centre to the Canada Revenue Agency under the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act;









(xv) à un fonctionnaire du Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada, mais uniquement en vue de permettre au Centre d’évaluer l’utilité des renseignements qu’il fournit à l’Agence du revenu du Canada en vertu de la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes;














(2) Subsection 241(4) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (p) and by adding the following after paragraph (q):









(2) Le paragraphe 241(4) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa q), de ce qui suit :














(r) provide taxpayer information to a person who has — under a program administered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compli­ance — entered into a contract to provide information to the Canada Revenue Agency, to the extent necessary to inform the person of any amount they may be entitled to under the contract and of the status of their claim under the contract; or






(s) provide taxpayer information, solely for the purpose of ensuring compliance with Part 1 of the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act, to an official of the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada, if the information






(i) can reasonably be considered to be relevant to a determination of whether a reporting entity (as defined in section 244.1) has complied with a duty or obligation under Part XV.1, and






(ii) does not directly or indirectly reveal the identity of a client (as defined in section 244.1).









r) fournir des renseignements confidentiels à une personne qui a conclu, dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale, un contrat pour la fourniture de renseignements à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, dans la mesure nécessaire pour informer la personne de toute somme qu’elle pourrait recevoir en vertu du contrat et de l’état de son dossier en vertu du contrat;






s) fournir à un fonctionnaire du Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada, dans l’unique but d’assurer l’observation de la partie 1 de la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, des renseignements confidentiels :






(i) d’une part, qu’il est raisonnable de considérer comme étant utiles pour déterminer si une entité déclarante, au sens de l’article 244.1, s’est conformée à un devoir ou à une obligation prévu par la partie XV.1,






(ii) d’autre part, qui ne révèlent pas, même indirectement, l’identité d’un client, au sens de l’article 244.1.














(3) Section 241 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (9.4):









(3) L’article 241 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (9.4), de ce qui suit :












Serious offences



(9.5) An official may provide to a law enforcement officer of an appropriate police organization








(a) taxpayer information, if the official has reasonable grounds to believe that the information will afford evidence of an act or omission in or outside of Canada that, if committed in Canada, would be








(i) an offence under any of








(A) section 3 of the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act,








(B) sections 119 to 121, 123 to 125 and 426 of the Criminal Code,








(C) section 465 of the Criminal Code as it relates to an offence described in clause (B), and








(D) sections 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 and 333.1, paragraphs 334(a) and 348(1)(e) and sections 349, 435 and 462.31 of the Criminal Code,








(ii) a terrorism offence or a criminal organization offence, as those terms are defined in section 2 of the Criminal Code, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more, or








(iii) an offence








(A) that is punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment,








(B) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 14 years or life, or








(C) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years and that








(I) resulted in bodily harm,








(II) involved the import, export, trafficking or production of drugs, or








(III) involved the use of a weapon; and








(b) information setting out the reasonable grounds referred to in paragraph (a), to the extent that any such grounds rely on information referred to in that paragraph.









(9.5) Un fonctionnaire peut fournir les renseignements ci-après à un agent d’exécution de la loi d’une organisation de police compétente :



Infractions graves




a) des renseignements confidentiels, si le fonctionnaire a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’ils constituent des éléments de preuve d’une action ou d’une omission commise au Canada ou à l’étranger qui, si elle était commise au Canada, constituerait :








(i) une infraction prévue à l’une des dispositions suivantes :








(A) l’article 3 de la Loi sur la corruption d’agents publics étrangers,








(B) les articles 119 à 121, 123 à 125 et 426 du Code criminel,








(C) l’article 465 du Code criminel, relativement à une infraction visée à la division (B),








(D) les articles 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 et 333.1, les alinéas 334a) et 348(1)e) et les articles 349, 435 et 462.31 du Code criminel,








(ii) une infraction de terrorisme ou une infraction d’organisation criminelle, au sens de l’article 2 du Code criminel, passible d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans ou plus,








(iii) une infraction passible :








(A) d’une peine minimale d’emprisonnement,








(B) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de quatorze ans ou d’emprisonnement à perpétuité,








(C) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans, et, selon le cas :








(I) dont la perpétration entraîne des lésions corporelles,








(II) qui met en cause l’importation, l’exportation, le trafic ou la production de drogues,








(III) qui met en cause l’usage d’une arme;








b) les renseignements établissant les motifs raisonnables mentionnés à l’alinéa a), dans la mesure où ces motifs sont fondés sur les renseignements visés à cet alinéa.
















29. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after Part XV:









29. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après la partie XV, de ce qui suit :














PART XV.1









PARTIE XV.1












REPORTING OF ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER









DÉCLARATION DES TÉLÉVIREMENTS












Definitions



244.1 The following definitions apply in this Part.




“cash”« espèces »



“cash” means coins referred to in section 7 of the Currency Act, notes issued by the Bank of Canada pursuant to the Bank of Canada Act that are intended for circulation in Canada or coins or bank notes of countries other than Canada.




“casino”« casino »



“casino” means an entity that is licensed, registered, permitted or otherwise authorized to do business under any of paragraphs 207(1)(a) to (g) of the Criminal Code and that conducts its business activities in a permanent establishment








(a) that the entity holds out to be a casino and in which roulette or card games are carried on; or








(b) where there is a slot machine, which, for the purposes of this definition, does not include a video lottery terminal.








A casino does not include an entity that is a registered charity and is licensed, registered, permitted or otherwise authorized to carry on business temporarily for charitable purposes, if the business is carried out in the establishment of the casino for not more than two consecutive days at a time under the supervision of the casino.




“client”« client »



“client” means a particular entity that engages in a financial transaction or activity with a reporting entity and includes an entity on whose behalf the particular entity is acting.




“credit union central”« centrale de caisses de crédit »



“credit union central” means a central cooperative credit society, as defined in section 2 of the Cooperative Credit Associations Act, or a credit union central or a federation of credit unions or caisses populaires that is regulated by a provincial Act other than one enacted by the legislature of Quebec.




“electronic funds transfer”« télévirement »



“electronic funds transfer” means the transmission — through any electronic, magnetic or optical device, telephone instrument or computer — of instructions for the transfer of funds, other than the transfer of funds within Canada. In the case of Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication messages, only SWIFT MT 103 messages are included.




“entity”« entité »



“entity” means an individual, a body corporate, a partnership, a fund or an unincorporated association or organization.




“funds”« fonds »



“funds” means cash, currency or securities, or negotiable instruments or other financial instruments, in any form, that indicate an entity’s title or interest, or for civil law a right, in them.




“money services business”« entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables »



“money services business” means an entity engaged in the business of foreign exchange dealing, of remitting funds or transmitting funds by any means or through any entity or electronic funds transfer network, or of issuing or redeeming money orders, traveller’s cheques or other similar negotiable instruments except for cheques payable to a named entity.




“reporting entity”« entité déclarante »



“reporting entity” means an entity that is








(a) an authorized foreign bank within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act in respect of its business in Canada, or a bank to which that Act applies;








(b) a cooperative credit society, savings and credit union or caisse populaire regulated by a provincial Act;








(c) a financial services cooperative regulated by An Act respecting financial services cooperatives, R.S.Q., c. C-67.3, or An Act respecting the Mouvement Desjardins, S.Q. 2000, c. 77;








(d) an association regulated by the Cooperative Credit Associations Act;








(e) a company to which the Trust and Loan Companies Act applies;








(f) a trust company regulated by a provincial Act;








(g) a loan company regulated by a provincial Act;








(h) a money services business;








(i) a casino, including a casino owned or controlled by Her Majesty;








(j) a department or an agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada or of a province that is engaged in the business of accepting deposit liabilities in the course of providing financial services to the public; or








(k) a credit union central in respect of financial services it offers to an entity, other than an entity that is referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (g) and (j) and is a member of that credit union central.









244.1 Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente partie.



Définitions




« casino » Entité autorisée par licence, permis ou enregistrement, ou autrement, à exercer une activité régie par l’un des alinéas 207(1)a) à g) du Code criminel et qui exerce cette activité dans un établissement stable, selon le cas :



« casino »“casino”




a) qu’elle présente comme étant un casino et où l’on peut jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes;








b) où se trouve un appareil à sous autre qu’un appareil de loterie vidéo.








La présente définition ne vise pas l’entité qui est un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré et qui est autorisée par licence, permis ou enregistrement, ou autrement, à exercer temporairement une activité à des fins de bienfaisance, si l’activité se déroule dans l’établissement d’un casino pendant au plus deux jours consécutifs à la fois, sous la surveillance du casino.








« centrale de caisses de crédit » Coopérative de crédit centrale, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les associations coopératives de crédit, ou centrale de caisses de crédit ou fédération de caisses de crédit ou de caisses populaires régie par une loi provinciale autre qu’une loi édictée par la législature du Québec.



« centrale de caisses de crédit »“credit union central”




« client » Entité qui se livre à une opération ou à une activité financières avec une entité déclarante, ainsi que toute entité pour le compte de qui elle agit.



« client »“client”




« entité » Particulier, personne morale, société de personnes ou fonds, ou organisation ou association non dotée de la personnalité morale.



« entité »“entity”




« entité déclarante » L’une ou l’autre des entités suivantes :



« entité déclarante »“reporting entity”




a) les banques régies par la Loi sur les banques et les banques étrangères autorisées, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les banques, dans le cadre des activités que ces dernières exercent au Canada;








b) les coopératives de crédit, caisses d’épargne et de crédit et caisses populaires régies par une loi provinciale;








c) les coopératives de services financiers régies par la Loi sur les coopératives de services financiers, L.R.Q., ch. C-67.3, ou par la Loi sur le Mouvement Desjardins, L.Q. 2000, ch. 77;








d) les associations régies par la Loi sur les associations coopératives de crédit;








e) les sociétés régies par la Loi sur les sociétés de fiducie et de prêt;








f) les sociétés de fiducie régies par une loi provinciale;








g) les sociétés de prêt régies par une loi provinciale;








h) les entreprises de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables;








i) les casinos, y compris ceux qui sont contrôlés par Sa Majesté ou dont elle est propriétaire;








j) les ministères et mandataires de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou d’une province qui se livrent à l’acceptation de dépôts dans le cadre de la prestation de services financiers au public;








k) les centrales de caisses de crédit, en ce qui a trait aux services financiers qu’elles offrent à une entité, sauf une entité visée à l’un des alinéas a) à g) et j) qui est membre de la centrale de caisses de crédit en cause.








« entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables » Entité qui se livre aux opérations de change, ou qui exploite une entreprise qui remet des fonds ou transmet des fonds par tout moyen ou par l’intermédiaire d’une entité ou d’un réseau de télévirement ou qui émet ou rachète des mandats-poste, des chèques de voyage ou d’autres titres négociables semblables, à l’exclusion des chèques libellés au nom d’une entité.



« entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables »“money services business”




« espèces » Pièces de monnaie visées à l’article 7 de la Loi sur la monnaie, billets émis aux fins de circulation au Canada par la Banque du Canada en vertu de la Loi sur la Banque du Canada ou pièces de monnaie ou billets de banque d’un pays étranger.



« espèces »“cash”




« fonds » Espèces, devises ou valeurs mobilières, ou titres négociables ou autres instruments financiers, quelle que soit leur forme, qui font foi du titre ou d’un intérêt ou, pour l’application du droit civil, d’un droit à l’égard de ceux-ci.



« fonds »“funds”




« télévirement » Transmission — par voie électronique, magnétique ou optique ou au moyen d’un appareil téléphonique ou d’un ordinateur — d’instructions pour un transfert de fonds, à l’exclusion du transfert de fonds à l’intérieur du Canada. Dans le cas des messages de la Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, seuls les messages SWIFT MT 103 sont visés par la présente définition.



« télévirement »“electronic funds transfer”










Electronic funds transfer



244.2 (1) Every reporting entity shall file with the Minister an information return in prescribed form in respect of








(a) the sending out of Canada, at the request of a client, of an electronic funds transfer of $10,000 or more in the course of a single transaction; or








(b) the receipt from outside Canada of an electronic funds transfer, sent at the request of a client, of $10,000 or more in the course of a single transaction.









244.2 (1) Toute entité déclarante est tenue de présenter au ministre une déclaration de renseignements établie sur le formulaire prescrit concernant :



Télévirement




a) le télévirement vers l’étranger, à la demande d’un client, de 10 000 $ ou plus au cours d’une seule opération;








b) le télévirement de l’étranger, à la demande d’un client, de 10 000 $ ou plus au cours d’une seule opération.














Transfer within Canada



(2) For greater certainty and subject to subsection (3), subsection (1) does not apply to a reporting entity in respect of an electronic funds transfer if the entity








(a) sends the transfer to an entity in Canada, even if the final recipient is outside Canada; or








(b) receives the transfer from an entity in Canada, even if the initial sender is outside Canada.









(2) Sous réserve du paragraphe (3), il est entendu que le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas, relativement à un télévirement, à l’entité déclarante qui, selon le cas :



Télévirement à l’intérieur du Canada




a) expédie le télévirement à une entité située au Canada, même si le destinataire final du télévirement est situé à l’étranger;








b) reçoit le télévirement d’une entité située au Canada, même si le premier expéditeur du télévirement est situé à l’étranger.














Intermediary



(3) Subsection (1) applies to a reporting entity in respect of an electronic funds transfer if the entity








(a) orders another reporting entity to send, at the request of a client, the transfer out of Canada, unless it provides the other reporting entity with the name and address of the client; or








(b) receives the transfer for a beneficiary in Canada from another reporting entity in circumstances where the initial sender is outside Canada, unless the transfer contains the name and address of the beneficiary.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique, relativement à un télévirement, à l’entité déclarante qui, selon le cas :



Intermédiaire




a) ordonne à une autre entité déclarante d’effectuer le télévirement vers l’étranger, à la demande d’un client, sauf si elle fournit à l’autre entité déclarante les nom et adresse du client;








b) reçoit le télévirement d’une autre entité déclarante pour un bénéficiaire au Canada dans des circonstances où le premier expéditeur du télévirement est situé à l’étranger, sauf si le télévirement indique les nom et adresse du bénéficiaire.














Transfer conducted by agent



(4) If a particular reporting entity is an agent of or is authorized to act on behalf of another reporting entity in respect of an electronic funds transfer, subsection (1) applies, in respect of the transfer, to the other reporting entity and not to the particular reporting entity.









(4) Si une entité déclarante donnée est le mandataire d’une autre entité déclarante, ou est habilitée à agir en son nom, relativement à un télévirement, le paragraphe (1) s’applique relativement au télévirement à l’autre entité déclarante et non à l’entité donnée.



Télévirement effectué par un mandataire










Casino



244.3 An electronic funds transfer in respect of which subsection 244.2(1) applies that occurs in the course of a business, temporarily conducted for charitable purposes in the establishment of a casino by a registered charity carried on for not more than two consecutive days at a time under the supervision of the casino, shall be reported by the supervising casino.









244.3 Tout télévirement relativement auquel le paragraphe 244.2(1) s’applique qui se produit pendant une activité qu’un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré exerce à des fins de bienfaisance temporairement, dans l’établissement d’un casino, pendant au plus deux jours consécutifs à la fois, sous la surveillance du casino, est déclaré par le casino surveillant l’activité.



Casino










Single transaction



244.4 (1) For the purposes of this Part, two or more electronic funds transfers of less than $10,000 each that are made within 24 consecutive hours and that total $10,000 or more are considered to be made in the course of a single transaction of $10,000 or more if








(a) an individual, other than a trust, who is a reporting entity knows that the transfers are conducted by, or on behalf of, the same entity; and








(b) an employee of a reporting entity, other than an entity described in paragraph (a), knows that the transfers are conducted by, or on behalf of, the same entity.









244.4 (1) Pour l’application de la présente partie, sont considérés comme une seule opération de 10 000 $ ou plus, deux ou plusieurs télévirements de moins de 10 000 $ chacun effectués au cours d’une période de vingt-quatre heures consécutives et totalisant 10 000 $ ou plus si les conditions ci-après sont réunies :



Opérations effectuées le même jour




a) un particulier, sauf une fiducie, qui est une entité déclarante sait que les télévirements sont effectués par une seule entité ou pour son compte;








b) un employé d’une entité déclarante, sauf une entité visée à l’alinéa a), sait que les télévirements sont effectués par une seule entité ou pour son compte.














Exception



(2) For greater certainty, subsection (1) does not apply in respect of an electronic funds transfer sent to two or more beneficiaries if the transfer is requested by








(a) an administrator of a pension fund that is regulated by or under an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of a province;








(b) a department or agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada or of a province;








(c) an incorporated city, town, village, met-ropolitan authority, township, district, county, rural municipality or other incorporated municipal body or an agent of any of them;








(d) an organization that operates a public hospital and that is designated by the Minister as a hospital authority under the Excise Tax Act, or an agent of such an organization; or








(e) a corporation that has minimum net assets of $75 million on its last audited balance sheet, whose shares are traded on a Canadian stock exchange or a designated stock exchange and that operates in a country that is a member of the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering established in 1989.









(2) Il est entendu que le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas relativement au télévirement envoyé à deux bénéficiaires ou plus qui est demandé par l’une ou l’autre des entités suivantes :



Exception




a) l’administrateur d’un fonds de pension qui est régi par une loi fédérale ou provinciale;








b) un ministère ou mandataire de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou d’une province;








c) une ville, constituée en personne morale ou non, un village, une autorité métropolitaine, un canton, un district, un comté, une municipalité rurale ou un autre organisme municipal constitué en personne morale, ou un mandataire de ceux-ci;








d) toute institution qui exploite un hôpital public et qui est désignée comme administration hospitalière par le ministre aux termes de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise, ou un mandataire de celle-ci;








e) toute société dont l’actif net, d’après son dernier bilan vérifié, est de 75 000 000 $ ou plus, dont les actions sont cotées dans une bourse de valeurs au Canada ou une bourse de valeurs désignée et qui exerce ses activités dans un pays membre du Groupe d’action financière sur le blanchiment de capitaux créé en 1989.














Foreign currency



244.5 If an electronic funds transfer is carried out by a reporting entity in a foreign currency, the amount of the transfer is to be converted into Canadian dollars using








(a) the official conversion rate of the Bank of Canada for the currency published in the Bank of Canada’s Daily Memorandum of Exchange Rates that is in effect at the time of the transfer; or








(b) if no official conversion rate is set out in that publication for the currency, the conversion rate that the entity would use for the currency in the normal course of business at the time of the transfer.









244.5 Si une entité déclarante effectue un télévirement en devises, le montant du télévirement est converti en dollars canadiens selon :



Devises




a) le taux de conversion officiel de la Banque du Canada publié dans son Bulletin quotidien des taux de change en vigueur au moment où le télévirement est effectué;








b) dans le cas où la devise ne figure pas dans ce bulletin, le taux de conversion que l’entité utiliserait dans le cours normal de ses activités au moment où le télévirement est effectué.














Filing of return



244.6 An information return in respect of an electronic funds transfer that is required to be filed by a reporting entity under this Part shall be filed








(a) not later than five working days after the day of the transfer; and








(b) using electronic media, in the manner specified by the Minister, if the entity has the technical capabilities to do so.









244.6 Toute déclaration de renseignements relative à un télévirement qu’une entité déclarante est tenue de produire aux termes de la présente partie doit :



Déclaration




a) d’une part, être produite dans les cinq jours ouvrables suivant la date du télévirement;








b) d’autre part, être transmise par voie électronique selon les directives établies par le ministre, si l’entité a les moyens techniques de le faire.














Record keeping



244.7 (1) Every reporting entity that is required to file an information return under this Part shall keep such records as will enable the Minister to determine whether the entity has complied with its duties and obligations under this Part.









244.7 (1) Toute entité déclarante qui est tenue de produire une déclaration de renseignements aux termes de la présente partie doit tenir des registres qui permettent au ministre de déterminer si elle s’est conformée à ses devoirs et obligations prévus par la présente partie.



Tenue de registres










Form of records



(2) A record that is required to be kept under this Part may be kept in machine-readable or electronic form if a paper copy can be readily produced from it.









(2) Tout registre à tenir aux termes de la présente partie peut être conservé sous une forme lisible par machine ou électronique, pourvu qu’un imprimé puisse facilement être produit.



Forme










Retention of records



(3) A reporting entity that is required to keep records under this Part in respect of an electronic funds transfer shall retain those records for a period of at least five years from the day of the transfer.









(3) Toute entité déclarante à qui incombe l’obligation de tenir des registres aux termes de la présente partie relativement à un télévirement doit les conserver pendant au moins cinq ans à compter de la date du télévirement.



Conservation












(2) Subsection (1) applies in respect of electronic funds transfers made after 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique relativement aux télévirements effectués après 2014.














(3) If subsection 256(3) comes into force, then on the later of January 1, 2015 and the day on which that subsection comes into force, the definition “casino” in section 244.1 of the Act, as enacted by subsection (1), is replaced by the following:






“casino” means






(a) the government of a province that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(a) of the Criminal Code,






(i) in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games, or






(ii) in any other permanent establishment, conducts and manages games that are operated on or through a slot machine, as defined in subsection 198(3) of that Act, or any other similar electronic gaming device, if there are more than 50 of those machines or other devices in the establishment;






(b) the government of a province that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, conducts and manages a lottery scheme, other than bingo or the sale of lottery tickets, that is accessible to the public through the Internet or other digital network, except if the network is an internal network within an establishment referred to in subparagraph (a)(ii);






(c) an organization that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(b) of the Criminal Code, in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games, unless the organization is a registered charity and the lottery scheme is conducted or managed for a period of not more than two consecutive days at a time; and






(d) the board of a fair or of an exhibition, or the operator of a concession leased by such a board, that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(c) of the Criminal Code, in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games.









(3) En cas d’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 256(3), à l’entrée en vigueur de ce paragraphe ou au 1er janvier 2015, le dernier en date étant à retenir, la définition de « casino », à l’article 244.1 de la même loi, édictée par le paragraphe (1), est remplacée par ce qui suit :






« casino » 






a) Le gouvernement d’une province qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)a) du Code criminel :






(i) met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement stable présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes,






(ii) met sur pied et exploite des jeux au moyen d’un appareil à sous, au sens du paragraphe 198(3) du Code criminel, ou autre dispositif de jeu électronique semblable dans tout autre établissement stable où se trouvent plus de cinquante de ces appareils à sous ou autres dispositifs semblables;






b) le gouvernement d’une province qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)a) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie, à l’exclusion d’un bingo ou de la vente de billets de loterie, accessible au public par Internet ou autre réseau numérique, à l’exception d’un réseau numérique interne d’un établissement visé au sous-alinéa a)(ii);






c) l’organisme qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)b) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement stable présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes, sauf dans le cas où l’organisme en question est un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré et que la loterie est mise sur pied et exploitée pendant deux jours consécutifs ou moins à la fois;






d) le conseil d’une foire ou d’une exposition, ou l’exploitant d’une concession louée auprès du conseil, qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)c) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement stable présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes.














(4) If subsection 256(2) comes into force, then on the later of January 1, 2015 and the day on which that subsection comes into force,






(a) the definition “money services business” in section 244.1 of the Act, as enacted by subsection (1), is replaced by the following:






“money services business” means an entity






(a) that has a place of business in Canada and that is engaged in the business of providing at least one of the following services:






(i) foreign exchange dealing,






(ii) remitting funds or transmitting funds by any means or through any entity or electronic funds transfer network,






(iii) issuing or redeeming money orders, traveller’s cheques or other similar negotiable instruments except for cheques payable to a named entity,






(iv) dealing in virtual currencies, as defined by regulation, or






(v) a prescribed service; or






(b) that does not have a place of business in Canada, that is engaged in the business of providing at least one of the following services that is directed at entities in Canada, and that provides those services to their customers in Canada:






(i) foreign exchange dealing,






(ii) remitting funds or transmitting funds by any means or through any entity or electronic funds transfer network,






(iii) issuing or redeeming money orders, traveller’s cheques or other similar negotiable instruments except for cheques payable to a named entity,






(iv) dealing in virtual currencies, as defined by regulation, or






(v) a prescribed service.






(b) section 244.2 of the Act, as enacted by subsection (1), is amended by adding the following after subsection (4):









(4) En cas d’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 256(2), à l’entrée en vigueur de ce paragraphe ou au 1er janvier 2015, le dernier en date étant à retenir :






a) la définition de « entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables », à l’article 244.1 de la même loi, édictée par le paragraphe (1), est remplacée par ce qui suit :






« entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables » Entité à laquelle l’un ou l’autre des énoncés ci-après s’applique :






a) elle a un lieu d’affaires au Canada et se livre à la fourniture de l’un des services suivants :






(i) les opérations de change,






(ii) la remise de fonds ou la transmission de fonds par tout moyen ou par l’intermédiaire d’une entité ou d’un réseau de télévirement,






(iii) l’émission ou le rachat de mandats-poste, de chèques de voyage ou d’autres titres négociables semblables, à l’exclusion des chèques libellés au nom d’une entité,






(iv) le commerce d’une monnaie virtuelle, au sens du règlement,






(v) un service visé par règlement;






b) elle n’a pas de lieu d’affaires au Canada et se livre à la fourniture, à l’intention d’entités se trouvant au Canada, de l’un des services ci-après, qu’elle fournit aux personnes ou entités se trouvant au Canada qui consomment ces services :






(i) les opérations de change,






(ii) la remise de fonds ou la transmission de fonds par tout moyen ou par l’intermédiaire d’une entité ou d’un réseau de télévirement,






(iii) l’émission ou le rachat de mandats-poste, de chèques de voyage ou d’autres titres négociables semblables, à l’exclusion des chèques libellés au nom d’une entité,






(iv) le commerce d’une monnaie virtuelle, au sens du règlement,






(v) un service visé par règlement.






b) l’article 244.2 de la même loi, édicté par le paragraphe (1), est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (4), de ce qui suit :












Entities outside Canada



(5) Subsection (1) does not apply to an entity described in paragraph (b) of the definition “money services business” in respect of the services it provides to entities outside Canada.









(5) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas aux entités visées à l’alinéa b) de la définition de « entreprise de transfert de fonds ou de vente de titres négociables » relativement aux services qu’elles fournissent à des entités se trouvant à l’étranger.



Entités à l’étranger












30. (1) The definition “credit union” in subsection 248(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









30. (1) La définition de « caisse de crédit », au paragraphe 248(1) de la même loi, est remplacée par ce qui suit :












“credit union”« caisse de crédit »



“credit union” has the meaning assigned by subsection 137(6), except for the purposes of Part XV.1;









« caisse de crédit » S’entend au sens du paragraphe 137(6), sauf pour l’application de la partie XV.1.



« caisse de crédit »“credit union”












(2) Paragraph 248(37)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 248(37)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(c) of an object referred to in subparagraph 39(1)(a)(i.1), other than an object acquired under a gifting arrangement (as defined in subsection 237.1(1)) that is a tax shelter;









c) les dons d’objets visés au sous-alinéa 39(1)a)(i.1), à l’exception d’objets acquis dans le cadre d’un arrangement de don, au sens du paragraphe 237.1(1), qui est un abri fiscal;














(3) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














(4) Subsection (2) applies to gifts made after February 10, 2014.









(4) Le paragraphe (2) s’applique aux dons faits après le 10 février 2014.










R.S., c. F-11



Financial Administration Act









Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques



L.R., ch. F-11












31. The Financial Administration Act is amended by adding the following after section 161:









31. La Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 161, de ce qui suit :












Meaning of “listed tax law”



162. (1) In this section, “listed tax law” means








(a) the Income Tax Act and the Income Tax Regulations;








(b) the Income Tax Conventions Interpretation Act;








(c) the Excise Tax Act and any regulations made under that Act;








(d) the Excise Act, 2001 and any regulations made under that Act;








(e) the Air Travelers Security Charge Act and any regulations made under that Act;








(f) the Excise Act and any regulations made under that Act; or








(g) the Customs Tariff and any regulations made under that Act.









162. (1) Au présent article, « textes fiscaux visés » s’entend des textes suivants :



Définition de « textes fiscaux visés »




a) la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu et le Règlement de l’impôt sur le revenu;








b) la Loi sur l’interprétation des conventions en matière d’impôts sur le revenu;








c) la Loi sur la taxe d’accise et les règlements pris sous son régime;








d) la Loi de 2001 sur l’accise et les règlements pris sous son régime;








e) la Loi sur le droit pour la sécurité des passagers du transport aérien et les règlements pris sous son régime;








f) la Loi sur l’accise et les règlements pris sous son régime;








g) le Tarif des douanes et les règlements pris sous son régime.














Tabling of list — legislative proposals



(2) The Minister shall table in the House of Commons, on or before the fifth day on which the House of Commons is sitting after October 31 of a particular fiscal year, a list of the specific legislative proposals to amend listed tax laws








(a) that the Government publicly announced before April 1 of the fiscal year preceding the particular fiscal year; and








(b) that have not been enacted or made before the date of tabling in substantially the same form as the proposal or in a form that reflects consultations and deliberations relating to the proposal.









(2) Le ministre dépose à la Chambre des communes, au plus tard le cinquième jour de séance après le 31 octobre d’un exercice donné, une liste des propositions législatives explicites qui visent à modifier les textes fiscaux visés et qui, à la fois :



Dépôt de la liste — propositions législatives




a) ont été annoncées publiquement par le gouvernement avant le 1er avril de l’exercice précédant l’exercice donné;








b) n’ont pas été édictées ou prises avant la date de dépôt sous une forme identique, pour l’essentiel, à la proposition ou sous une forme qui tient compte des consultations et des délibérations au sujet de la proposition.














Exception



(3) The list referred to in subsection (2) shall not include a specific legislative proposal that has been publicly withdrawn by the Government or an announcement of a general intention to develop a specific legislative proposal.









(3) Est exclue de la liste mentionnée au paragraphe (2) toute proposition législative explicite qui a été retirée publiquement par le gouvernement ou toute annonce d’une intention générale de mettre au point une proposition législative explicite.



Exception










Exception



(4) The obligation to table does not apply in respect of a particular fiscal year if








(a) there are no specific legislative proposals to be included in the list referred to in subsection (2); or








(b) the fifth day on which the House of Commons is sitting after October 31 of the particular fiscal year is less than 12 months after the last general election.









(4) Le ministre n'est tenu à aucun dépôt à l'égard d'un exercice donné dans l'une ou l'autre des circonstances suivantes :



Exception




a) il y a absence de propositions législatives explicites devant figurer sur la liste visée au paragraphe (2);








b) le cinquième jour de séance après le 31 octobre de l'exercice donné suit de moins de douze mois la dernière élection générale.












C.R.C., c. 945



Income Tax Regulations









Règlement de l’impôt sur le revenu



C.R.C., ch. 945












32. Section 103 of the Income Tax Regulations is amended by adding the following after subsection (8):









32. L’article 103 du Règlement de l’impôt sur le revenu est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (8), de ce qui suit :














(9) The amount to be deducted or withheld by a person from any payment of an amount described in paragraph 56(1)(z.4) of the Act is






(a) in the case of a payment to a resident of Quebec, 30% of the payment; or






(b) in the case of a payment to a resident of Canada who is not a resident of Quebec, 50% of the payment.









(9) La somme à déduire ou à retenir par une personne sur le paiement d’une somme visée à l’alinéa 56(1)z.4) de la Loi représente :






a) s’agissant d’un paiement fait à une personne résidant au Québec, 30 % du paie-ment;






b) s’agissant d’un paiement fait à une personne résidant au Canada mais non au Québec, 50 % du paiement.














33. (1) The portion of paragraph 108(1.1)(a) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









33. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa 108(1.1)a) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000, all amounts deducted or withheld from payments described in the definition “remuneration” in subsection 100(1) that are made in a month in the particular calendar year by the employer shall be remitted to the Receiver General









a) égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $, les montants déduits ou retenus sur les paiements visés à la définition de « rémunération » au paragraphe 100(1) qui sont effectués par l’employeur au cours d’un mois de l’année civile donnée doivent être remis au receveur général au plus tard :














(2) The portion of paragraph 108(1.1)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage de l’alinéa 108(1.1)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) equal to or greater than $100,000, all amounts deducted or withheld from payments described in the definition “remuneration” in subsection 100(1) that are made in a month in the particular calendar year by the employer shall be remitted to the Receiver General on or before the third day, not including a Saturday or holiday, after the end of the following periods in which the payments were made,









b) égale ou supérieure à 100 000 $, les montants déduits ou retenus sur les paiements visés à la définition de « rémunération » au paragraphe 100(1) qui sont effectués par l’employeur au cours d’un mois de l’année civile donnée doivent être remis au rece-veur général au plus tard le troisième jour — samedis et jours fériés non compris — suivant la fin des périodes ci-après au cours desquelles les paiements ont été effectués :














(3) Paragraph 108(1.11)(a) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 108(1.11)a) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) in accordance with subsection (1), if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the calendar year preceding the particular calendar year is less than $25,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected; or









a) conformément au paragraphe (1), si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année civile précédant l’année civile donnée est inférieure à 25 000 $ et s’il informe le ministre de son choix;














(4) The portion of paragraph 108(1.11)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(4) Le passage de l’alinéa 108(1.11)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the calendar year preceding the particular calendar year is equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected,









b) si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année civile précédant l’année civile donnée est égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $ et s’il informe le ministre de son choix :














(5) Subparagraph 108(1.2)(a)(iii) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









(5) Le sous-alinéa 108(1.2)a)(iii) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(iii) subsection 82(1) of the Employment Insurance Act,









(iii) du paragraphe 82(1) de la Loi sur l’assurance-emploi,














(6) Subsections (1) to (4) apply to amounts deducted or withheld after 2014.









(6) Les paragraphes (1) à (4) s’appliquent aux montants déduits ou retenus après 2014.














34. Paragraph 202(2)(m) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









34. L’alinéa 202(2)m) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(m) a payment described in paragraph 212(1)(v) or (x) of the Act,









m) d’un paiement visé aux alinéas 212(1)v) ou x) de la Loi,














35. (1) Section 6708 of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









35. (1) L’article 6708 du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














6708. For the purposes of paragraph 204.8(2)(b), section 27.2 of the Community Small Business Investment Funds Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 18, is a prescribed wind-up rule.









6708. Pour l’application de l’alinéa 204.8(2)b), l’article 27.2 de la Loi de 1992 sur les fonds communautaires de placement dans les petites entreprises, L.O. 1992, ch. 18, est une règle de liquidation.














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on November 27, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 27 novembre 2013.














36. (1) Subsection 8517(3.01) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









36. (1) Le paragraphe 8517(3.01) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(3.001) Subsection (3.01) applies in respect of a transfer of an amount on behalf of an individual in full or partial satisfaction of the individual’s entitlement to benefits under a defined benefit provision of a registered pension plan if






(a) the individual is an employee or a former employee of an employer (or a predecessor employer of the employer) that was a participating employer under the provision;






(b) lifetime retirement benefits paid or payable to the individual under the provision have been reduced because the assets of the plan are insufficient to pay the benefits provided under the provision of the plan as registered;






(c) the Minister has approved the application of subsection (3.01) in respect of the transfer; and






(d) either






(i) the plan is not an individual pension plan and the reduction in the lifetime retirement benefits paid or payable to the individual has been approved under the Pension Benefits Standards Act, 1985 or a similar law of a province, or






(ii) the plan is an individual pension plan, the amount transferred from the plan on behalf of the individual is the last payment from the plan to the individual and all the property held in connection with the plan is distributed from the plan on behalf of plan members within 90 days of the transfer.









(3.001) Le paragraphe (3.01) s’applique relativement au transfert d’une somme pour le compte d’un particulier en règlement total ou partiel de son droit aux prestations prévues par une disposition à prestations déterminées d’un régime de pension agréé si les conditions ci-après sont réunies :






a) le particulier est un employé ou un ancien employé d’un employeur (ou d’un employeur que celui-ci a remplacé) qui était un employeur participant dans le cadre de la disposition;






b) des prestations viagères payées ou à payer au particulier dans le cadre de la disposition ont été réduites du fait que les actifs du régime sont insuffisants pour verser les prestations prévues par la disposition du régime tel qu’il est agréé;






c) le ministre a approuvé l’application du paragraphe (3.01) relativement au transfert;






d) selon le cas :






(i) le régime n’est pas un régime de retraite individuel et la réduction des prestations viagères payées ou à payer au particulier a été approuvée en vertu de la Loi de 1985 sur les normes de prestation de pension ou d’une loi provinciale semblable,






(ii) le régime est un régime de retraite individuel, la somme transférée du régime pour le compte du particulier est le dernier paiement provenant du régime et tous les biens détenus dans le cadre du régime sont distribués pour le compte des participants au régime dans les 90 jours suivant le transfert.














(3.01) If this subsection applies, the description of A in subsection (1) is to be read as follows in respect of the transfer:






A      is the amount of the individual’s lifetime retirement benefits under the provision commuted in connection with the transfer, as determined under subsection (4), but without reference to the benefit reduction referred to in paragraph (3)(c) or (3.001)(b), as the case may be; and









(3.01) En cas d’application du présent paragraphe, l’élément A de la formule figurant au paragraphe (1) est réputé avoir le libellé ci-après en ce qui concerne le transfert :






A      représente le montant, calculé au paragraphe (4), des prestations viagères assurées au particulier par la disposition qui sont rachetées en vue du transfert, compte non tenu de la réduction mentionnée aux alinéas (3)c) ou (3.001)b), selon le cas;














(2) Subsection (1) applies in respect of transfers from registered pension plans made after 2012.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique relativement aux transferts de régimes de pension agréés effectués après 2012.














37. (1) Section 9000 of the Regulations and the heading “Prescribed Trust not a Financial Institution” before it are replaced by the following:









37. (1) L’article 9000 du même règlement et l’intertitre « Fiducie qui n’est pas une institution financière » le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Prescribed Person not a Financial Institution









Personne qui n’est pas une institution financière














9000. For the purposes of paragraph (e) of the definition “financial institution” in subsection 142.2(1) of the Act, the following are prescribed persons:






(a) the Business Development Bank of Canada;






(b) BDC Capital Inc.; and






(c) a trust, at any particular time, if at that particular time






(i) the trust is a related segregated fund trust (within the meaning assigned by paragraph 138.1(1)(a) of the Act),






(ii) the trust is deemed, under paragraph 138.1(1)(a) of the Act, to have been created at a time that is not more than two years before that particular time, and






(iii) the cost of the trustee’s interest (as determined by paragraph 138.1(1)(c) and (d) of the Act) in the trust does not exceed $5,000,000.









9000. Les personnes ci-après sont des personnes visées pour l’application de la définition de « institution financière » au paragraphe 142.2(1) de la Loi :






a) la Banque de développement du Canada;






b) la BDC Capital Inc.;






c) une fiducie, à un moment donné, à l’égard de laquelle les conditions ci-après sont réunies à ce moment :






(i) la fiducie est une fiducie créée à l’égard du fonds réservé, au sens de l’alinéa 138.1(1)a) de la Loi,






(ii) la fiducie est réputée, en vertu de cet alinéa, avoir été créée au plus deux ans avant ce moment,






(iii) le coût de la participation du fiduciaire dans la fiducie, déterminé selon les alinéas 138.1(1)c) et d) de la Loi, ne dépasse pas 5 000 000 $.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to taxation years that end after November 29, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux années d’imposition se terminant après le 29 novembre 2013.










C.R.C., c. 385



Canada Pension Plan Regulations









Règlement sur le Régime de pensions du Canada



C.R.C., ch. 385












38. (1) The portion of paragraph 8(1.1)(a) of the Canada Pension Plan Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









38. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa 8(1.1)a) du Règlement sur le Régime de pensions du Canada précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000, the employer shall remit the employee’s contribution and the employer’s contribution to the Receiver General









a) égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $, l’employeur doit remettre au receveur général la cotisation de l’employé et la cotisation de l’employeur :














(2) The portion of paragraph 8(1.1)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage de l’alinéa 8(1.1)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) equal to or greater than $100,000, the employer shall remit the employee’s contribution and the employer’s contribution to the Receiver General on or before the third day, not including a Saturday or holiday, after the end of the following periods in which remuneration was paid,









b) égale ou supérieure à 100 000 $, l’employeur doit remettre au receveur général la cotisation de l’employé et la cotisation de l’employeur au plus tard le troisième jour —samedis et jours fériés non compris — suivant la fin des périodes ci-après au cours desquelles la rémunération a été payée :














(3) Paragraph 8(1.11)(a) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 8(1.11)a) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) in accordance with subsection (1), if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the calendar year preceding the particular calendar year is less than $25,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected; or









a) conformément au paragraphe (1), si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année civile précédant l’année civile donnée est inférieure à 25 000 $ et s’il informe le ministre de son choix;














(4) The portion of paragraph 8(1.11)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(4) Le passage de l’alinéa 8(1.11)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the calendar year preceding the particular calendar year is equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected,









b) si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année civile précédant l’année civile donnée est égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $ et s’il informe le ministre de son choix :














(5) Subsections (1) to (4) apply to amounts deducted or withheld after 2014.









(5) Les paragraphes (1) à (4) s’appliquent aux montants déduits ou retenus après 2014.










SOR/97-33



Insurable Earnings and Collection of Premiums Regulations









Règlement sur la rémunération assurable et la perception des cotisations



DORS/97-33












39. (1) The portion of paragraph 4(2)(a) of the Insurable Earnings and Collection of Premiums Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









39. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa 4(2)a) du Règlement sur la rémunération assurable et la perception des cotisations précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) if the average monthly withholding amount of an employer for the second year preceding a particular year is equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000, the employer shall remit employees’ premiums and the employer’s premiums payable under the Act and these Regulations to the Receiver General









a) dans le cas où la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par l’employeur pour la deuxième année précédant une année donnée est égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $, l’employeur doit verser au receveur général les cotisations ouvrières et les cotisations patronales payables aux termes de la Loi et du présent règlement dans le délai suivant :














(2) The portion of paragraph 4(2)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage de l’alinéa 4(2)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) if the average monthly withholding amount of an employer for the second year preceding a particular year is equal to or greater than $100,000, the employer shall remit employees’ premiums and the employer’s premiums payable under the Act and these Regulations to the Receiver General on or before the third day, not including a Saturday or holiday, after the end of each of the following periods in which insurable earnings were paid, namely,









b) dans le cas où la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par l’employeur pour la deuxième année précédant une année donnée est égale ou supérieure à 100 000 $, l’employeur doit verser au receveur général les cotisations ouvrières et les cotisations patronales payables aux termes de la Loi et du présent règlement au plus tard le troisième jour — samedis et jours fériés non compris — suivant la fin de chacune des périodes ci-après au cours desquelles la rémunération assurable a été versée :














(3) Paragraph 4(3)(a) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 4(3)a) du même règlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) in accordance with subsection (1), if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the year preceding the particular year is less than $25,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected; and









a) conformément au paragraphe (1), si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année précédant l’année donnée est inférieure à 25 000 $ et s’il a informé le ministre de son choix;














(4) The portion of paragraph 4(3)(b) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









(4) Le passage de l’alinéa 4(3)b) du même règlement précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) if the average monthly withholding amount of the employer for the year preceding the particular year is equal to or greater than $25,000 and less than $100,000 and the employer has advised the Minister that the employer has so elected,









b) si la retenue mensuelle moyenne effectuée par lui pour l’année précédant l’année donnée est égale ou supérieure à 25 000 $ et inférieure à 100 000 $ et s’il a informé le ministre de son choix :














(5) Subsections (1) to (4) apply to amounts deducted or withheld after 2014.









(5) Les paragraphes (1) à (4) s’appliquent aux montants déduits ou retenus après 2014.














PART 2









PARTIE 2










R.S., c. E-15



AMENDMENTS TO THE EXCISE TAX ACT (GST/HST MEASURES)









MODIFICATION DE LA LOI SUR LA TAXE D’ACCISE (MESURES RELATIVES À LA TPS/TVH)



L.R., ch. E-15










2007, c. 18, s. 6(2)



40. (1) Paragraph (c) of the definition “qualifying member” in subsection 156(1) of the Excise Tax Act is replaced by the following:









40. (1) L’alinéa c) de la définition de « membre admissible », au paragraphe 156(1) de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise, est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 18, par. 6(2)












(c) one of the following conditions is met:






(i) the registrant has property (other than financial instruments and property having a nominal value) and has last manufactured, produced, acquired or imported all or substantially all of its property (other than financial instruments and property having a nominal value) for consumption, use or supply exclusively in the course of commercial activities of the registrant,






(ii) the registrant has no property (other than financial instruments and property having a nominal value) and has made supplies and all or substantially all of the supplies made by the registrant are taxable supplies, or






(iii) the registrant has no property (other than financial instruments and property having a nominal value) and has not made taxable supplies and it is reasonable to expect that






(A) the registrant will be making supplies throughout the next 12 months,






(B) all or substantially all of those supplies will be taxable supplies, and






(C) all or substantially all of the property (other than financial instruments and property having a nominal value) to be manufactured, produced, acquired or imported by the registrant within the next 12 months will be for consumption, use or supply exclusively in the course of commercial activities of the registrant.









c) selon le cas :






(i) il a des biens (autres que des effets financiers et des biens d’une valeur nominale) et il a fabriqué, produit, acquis ou importé, la dernière fois, la totalité ou la presque totalité de ses biens (autres que des effets financiers et des biens d’une valeur nominale) pour les consommer, les utiliser ou les fournir exclusivement dans le cadre de ses activités commerciales,






(ii) il n’a pas de biens autres que des effets financiers et des biens d’une valeur nominale, il a effectué des fournitures et la totalité ou la presque totalité de ses fournitures sont des fournitures taxables,






(iii) il n’a pas de biens autres que des effets financiers et des biens d’une valeur nominale, il n’a pas effectué de fournitures taxables et il est raisonnable de s’attendre à ce qui suit :






(A) il effectuera des fournitures tout au long des douze mois à venir,






(B) la totalité ou la presque totalité de ces fournitures seront des fournitures taxables,






(C) la totalité ou la presque totalité des biens (autres que des effets financiers et des biens d’une valeur nominale) qui seront fabriqués, produits, acquis ou importés par lui au cours des douze mois à venir seront destinés à être consommés, utilisés ou fournis exclusivement dans le cadre de ses activités commerciales.












2007, c. 18, s. 6(11)



(2) Subsection 156(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 156(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 18, par. 6(11)










Election for nil consideration



(2) For the purposes of this Part, if at any time after 2014 a person that is a specified member of a qualifying group files an election made jointly by the person and another specified member of the group, every taxable supply made between the person and the other specified member at a time when the election is in effect is deemed to have been made for no consideration.









(2) Pour l’application de la présente partie, si une personne qui est un membre déterminé d’un groupe admissible produit après 2014 un choix qu’elle a fait conjointement avec un autre membre déterminé du groupe, toute fourniture taxable effectuée entre eux à un moment où le choix est en vigueur est réputée être effectuée sans contrepartie.



Choix visant les fournitures sans contrepartie












(3) Section 156 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(3) L’article 156 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Elections filed before 2015



(2.01) For the purposes of this section, if an election made under this section has been filed by any person before January 1, 2015, the election is deemed never to have been filed.









(2.01) Pour l’application du présent article, le choix qui y est prévu et qui est produit avant le 1er janvier 2015 est réputé ne pas avoir été produit.



Choix produit avant 2015










1993, c. 27, s. 27(4)



(4) Subsection 156(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 156(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 27, par. 27(4)










Form of election and revocation



(4) An election under subsection (2) made jointly by a particular specified member of a qualifying group and another specified member of the group and a revocation of the election by those specified members shall








(a) be made in prescribed form containing prescribed information and specify the day (in this subsection referred to as the “effective day”) on which the election or revocation is to become effective; and








(b) be filed with the Minister in prescribed manner on or before








(i) the particular day that is the earlier of








(A) the day on or before which the particular specified member must file a return under Division V for the reporting period of the particular specified member that includes the effective day, and








(B) the day on or before which the other specified member must file a return under Division V for the reporting period of the other specified member that includes the effective day, or








(ii) any day after the particular day that the Minister may allow.









(4) Le choix conjoint fait par un membre déterminé donné d’un groupe admissible et un autre membre déterminé du groupe et la révocation du choix par ceux-ci :



Forme du choix et de la révocation




a) d’une part, sont faits en la forme déterminée par le ministre, contiennent les renseignements requis par celui-ci et précisent la date de leur entrée en vigueur (appelée « date d’entrée en vigueur » au présent paragraphe);








b) d’autre part, sont présentés au ministre, selon les modalités qu’il détermine, au plus tard :








(i) à celle des dates ci-après qui est antérieure à l’autre :








(A) la date où le membre déterminé donné est tenu, au plus tard, de produire une déclaration aux termes de la section V pour sa période de déclaration qui comprend la date d’entrée en vigueur,








(B) la date où l’autre membre déterminé est tenu, au plus tard, de produire une déclaration aux termes de la section V pour sa période de déclaration qui comprend la date d’entrée en vigueur,








(ii) à toute date postérieure que fixe le ministre.
















(5) Section 156 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (4):









(5) L’article 156 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (4), de ce qui suit :












Joint and several liability



(5) A particular person and another person are jointly and severally, or solidarily, liable for all obligations under this Part that result upon, or as a consequence of, a failure to account for or pay as and when required under this Part an amount of net tax of the particular person or of the other person if that tax is attributable to a supply made at any time between the particular person and the other person and if








(a) an election under subsection (2) made jointly by the particular person and the other person








(i) is in effect at that time, or








(ii) ceased to be in effect before that time but the particular person and the other person are conducting themselves as if the election were in effect at that time; or








(b) the particular person and the other person purport to have jointly made an election under subsection (2) before that time and are conducting themselves as if an election under subsection (2) made jointly by the particular person and the other person were in effect at that time.









(5) Une personne donnée et une autre personne sont solidairement responsables des obligations prévues par la présente partie qui découlent du défaut de verser un montant de taxe nette de l’une ou l’autre personne, ou d’en rendre compte, selon les modalités de temps ou autres prévues par la présente partie, si cette taxe est attribuable à une fourniture effectuée entre elles à un moment donné et que, selon le cas :



Responsabilité solidaire




a) le choix prévu au paragraphe (2) fait conjointement par elles :








(i) est en vigueur à ce moment,








(ii) a cessé d’être en vigueur avant ce moment, mais les personnes agissent comme s’il était en vigueur à ce moment;








b) les personnes prétendent avoir fait le choix conjoint prévu au paragraphe (2) avant ce moment et agissent comme si ce choix était en vigueur à ce moment.
















(6) Subsections (1) and (3) come into force on January 1, 2015.









(6) Les paragraphes (1) et (3) entrent en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














(7) Subsection (2) applies to any supply made after 2014.









(7) Le paragraphe (2) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après 2014.














(8) Subsection (4) applies in respect of an election or a revocation the effective date of which is after 2014 and in respect of an election that is in effect on January 1, 2015, except that for an election that is in effect before 2015 and for a revocation of that election that is to become effective before 2016, paragraph 156(4)(b) of the Act, as enacted by subsection (4), is to be read as follows:






(b) be filed with the Minister in prescribed manner after 2014 and before January 1, 2016 or any later day that the Minister may allow.









(8) Le paragraphe (4) s’applique relativement à un choix ou à une révocation dont la date d’entrée en vigueur est postérieure à 2014 ainsi que relativement à un choix qui est en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015. Toutefois, dans le cas d’un choix qui est en vigueur avant 2015 et de la révocation de ce choix qui doit entrer en vigueur avant 2016, l’alinéa 156(4)b) de la même loi, édicté par le paragraphe (4), est réputé avoir le libellé suivant :






b) d’autre part, sont présentés au ministre, selon les modalités qu’il détermine, après 2014 et avant le 1er janvier 2016 ou à toute date postérieure que fixe le ministre.














(9) Subsection (5) applies in respect of any supply made after 2014.









(9) Le paragraphe (5) s’applique relativement aux fournitures effectuées après 2014.












2007, c. 18, s. 13(1)



41. (1) Subparagraph 178.8(7)(c)(ii) of the Act is replaced by the following:









41. (1) Le sous-alinéa 178.8(7)c)(ii) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 18, par. 13(1)












(ii) the amount of the rebate, abatement or refund shall be added in determining the net tax of the constructive importer for the reporting period in which the tax adjustment note is received, to the extent that the amount has been included in determining an input tax credit claimed by the constructive importer in a return filed for a preceding reporting period or the constructive importer is or was entitled to be compensated under a warranty for loss suffered because of any of the circumstances that gave rise to the rebate, abatement or refund by receiving a supply of replacement parts, or replacement property, that are goods included in section 5 of Schedule VII, and









(ii) le montant du remboursement ou de l’abattement est ajouté dans le calcul de la taxe nette de l’importateur effectif pour la période de déclaration au cours de laquelle la note de redressement de taxe est reçue, dans la mesure où il a été inclus dans le calcul d’un crédit de taxe sur les intrants que l’importateur effectif a demandé dans une déclaration produite pour une période de déclaration antérieure ou dans la mesure où l’importateur effectif peut ou pouvait recevoir, aux termes d’une garantie et en dédommagement des pertes découlant de l’une des circonstances ayant donné lieu au remboursement ou à l’abattement, une fourniture de pièces de rechange, ou de biens de remplacement, qui constituent des produits figurant à l’article 5 de l’annexe VII,














(2) Subsection (1) applies to goods imported on or after October 3, 2003 and to goods imported before that day that were not accounted for under section 32 of the Customs Act before that day.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux produits importés après le 2 octobre 2003 ainsi qu’aux produits importés avant le 3 octobre 2003 qui, avant cette date, n’ont pas fait l’objet de la déclaration en détail ou provisoire prévue à l’article 32 de la Loi sur les douanes.












1993, c. 27, s. 44(1)



42. Subparagraph 179(2)(c)(i) of the Act is replaced by the following:









42. Le sous-alinéa 179(2)c)(i) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 27, par. 44(1)












(i) states the consignee’s name and registration number assigned under section 241, and









(i) indique le nom du consignataire et le numéro d’inscription qui lui a été attribué en application de l’article 241,














43. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 180:









43. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 180, de ce qui suit :












Restriction on recovery



180.01 If, under paragraph 180(d), a partic-ular person is deemed to have paid tax equal to the tax paid by a non-resident person, the following rules apply:








(a) subsection 232(3) does not apply in respect of the tax paid by the non-resident person; and








(b) no portion of the tax paid by the non-resident person shall be rebated, refunded or remitted to the non-resident person, or shall otherwise be recovered by the non-resident person, under this or any other Act of Parliament.









180.01 Les règles ci-après s’appliquent dans le cas où une personne donnée est réputée, en vertu de l’alinéa 180d), avoir payé une taxe égale à celle payée par une personne non-résidente :



Restriction touchant le recouvrement




a) le paragraphe 232(3) ne s’applique pas relativement à la taxe payée par la personne non-résidente;








b) aucune partie de la taxe payée par la personne non-résidente ne peut lui être remboursée ou remise, ou être autrement recouvrée par elle, sous le régime de la présente loi ou d’une autre loi fédérale.
















(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on January 17, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 17 janvier 2014.












1997, c. 10, s. 44(1)



44. (1) Subsection 225(3.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









44. (1) Le paragraphe 225(3.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1997, ch. 10, par. 44(1)










Restriction



(3.1) An amount shall not be included in the total for B in the formula set out in subsection (1) for a reporting period of a person to the extent that, before the end of the period, the amount








(a) is included in an adjustment, refund or credit for which a credit note referred to in subsection 232(3) has been received by the person or a debit note referred to in that subsection has been issued by the person; or








(b) was otherwise rebated, refunded or remitted to the person, or was otherwise recovered by the person, under this or any other Act of Parliament.









(3.1) Un montant n’est pas à inclure dans le total visé à l’élément B de la formule figurant au paragraphe (1) pour la période de déclaration d’une personne dans la mesure où, avant la fin de la période, le montant, selon le cas :



Autre restriction




a) est inclus dans un redressement, un remboursement ou un crédit pour lequel la personne a reçu une note de crédit visée au paragraphe 232(3) ou remis une note de débit visée à ce paragraphe;








b) a été autrement remboursé ou remis à la personne, ou autrement recouvré par elle, sous le régime de la présente loi ou d’une autre loi fédérale.
















(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 23, 1996.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 23 avril 1996.












2013, c. 34, s. 416(1)



45. (1) Subsection 225.1(4.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









45. (1) Le paragraphe 225.1(4.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2013, ch. 34, par. 416(1)










Restriction



(4.1) An amount is not to be included in the total for B in the formula set out in subsection (2) for a reporting period of a charity to the extent that, before the end of the period, the amount








(a) is included in an adjustment, refund or credit for which a credit note referred to in subsection 232(3) has been received by the charity or a debit note referred to in that subsection has been issued by the charity; or








(b) was otherwise rebated, refunded or remitted to the charity, or was otherwise recovered by the charity, under this or any other Act of Parliament.









(4.1) Un montant n’est pas à inclure dans le total visé à l’élément B de la formule figurant au paragraphe (2) pour la période de déclaration d’un organisme de bienfaisance dans la mesure où, avant la fin de la période, le montant, selon le cas :



Autre restriction




a) est inclus dans un redressement, un remboursement ou un crédit pour lequel l’organisme a reçu une note de crédit visée au paragraphe 232(3) ou remis une note de débit visée à ce paragraphe;








b) a été autrement remboursé ou remis à l’organisme, ou autrement recouvré par lui, sous le régime de la présente loi ou d’une autre loi fédérale.
















(2) Subsection (1) applies for the purpose of determining the net tax of a charity for reporting periods beginning after 1996.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique en vue du calcul de la taxe nette d’un organisme de bienfaisance pour les périodes de déclaration commençant après 1996.












1993, c. 27, s. 93(1)



46. (1) Paragraph 232(3)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









46. (1) L’alinéa 232(3)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 27, par. 93(1)












(c) the amount shall be added in determining the net tax of the other person for the reporting period of the other person in which the debit note is issued to the particular person or the credit note is received by the other person, to the extent that the amount has been included in determining an input tax credit claimed by the other person in a return filed for a preceding reporting period of the other person; and









c) le montant est ajouté dans le calcul de la taxe nette de l’autre personne pour sa période de déclaration au cours de laquelle elle remet la note de débit ou reçoit la note de crédit, dans la mesure où il a été inclus dans le calcul d’un crédit de taxe sur les intrants qu’elle a demandé dans une déclaration produite pour une de ses périodes de déclaration antérieures;














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 23, 1996.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 23 avril 1996.














47. Section 241 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1.2):









47. L’article 241 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1.2), de ce qui suit :












Notice of intent



(1.3) If the Minister has reason to believe that a person that is not registered under this Subdivision is required to be registered for the purposes of this Part and has failed to apply for registration under this Subdivision as and when required, the Minister may send a notice in writing (in this section referred to as a “notice of intent”) to the person that the Minister proposes to register the person under subsection (1.5).









(1.3) Si le ministre a des raisons de croire qu’une personne qui n’est pas inscrite aux termes de la présente sous-section doit l’être pour l’application de la présente partie mais n’a pas présenté de demande en ce sens aux termes de la présente sous-section selon les modalités et dans les délais prévus, il peut lui envoyer par écrit un avis (appelé « avis d’intention » au présent article) selon lequel il propose de l’inscrire aux termes du paragraphe (1.5).



Avis d’intention










Representations to Minister



(1.4) Upon receipt of a notice of intent, a person shall apply for registration under this Subdivision or establish to the satisfaction of the Minister that the person is not required to be registered for the purposes of this Part.









(1.4) Sur réception d’un avis d’intention, la personne doit présenter une demande d’inscription aux termes de la présente sous-section ou convaincre le ministre qu’elle n’est pas tenue d’être inscrite pour l’application de la présente partie.



Démarches auprès du ministre










Registration by Minister



(1.5) If, after 60 days after the particular day on which a notice of intent was sent by the Minister to a person, the person has not applied for registration under this Subdivision and the Minister is not satisfied that the person is not required to be registered for the purposes of this Part, the Minister may register the person and, upon doing so, shall assign a registration number to the person and notify the person in writing of the registration number and the effective date of the registration, which effective date is not to be earlier than 60 days after the particular day.









(1.5) Si, au terme de la période de 60 jours suivant l’envoi par le ministre de l’avis d’intention à la personne, celle-ci n’a pas présenté de demande d’inscription aux termes de la présente sous-section et que le ministre n’est pas convaincu qu’elle n’est pas tenue d’être inscrite pour l’application de la présente partie, il peut inscrire la personne. Le cas échéant, il lui attribue un numéro d’inscription et l’avise par écrit de ce numéro et de la date de prise d’effet de l’inscription, laquelle ne peut être antérieure à la date qui suit de 60 jours la date d’envoi de l’avis d’intention.



Inscription par le ministre










2010, c. 12, s. 76(1)



48. (1) The heading “Information Return for Financial Institutions” before section 273.2 of the Act is replaced by the following:









48. (1) L’intertitre « Déclaration de renseignements des institutions financières » précédant l’article 273.2 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, par. 76(1)










Information Returns









Déclarations de renseignements














(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














49. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 273.2:









49. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 273.2, de ce qui suit :












Electronic funds transfer



273.3 For greater certainty, information obtained by the Minister under Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act may be used for the purposes of this Part.









273.3 Il est entendu que les renseignements obtenus par le ministre sous le régime de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu peuvent être utilisés pour l’application de la présente partie.



Télévirement












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














50. (1) Paragraph 295(5)(d) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (vi), by adding “or” at the end of subparagraph (vii) and by adding the following after subparagraph (vii):









50. (1) L’alinéa 295(5)d) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le sous-alinéa (vii), de ce qui suit :














(viii) to an official of the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada solely for the purpose of enabling the Centre to evaluate the usefulness of information provided by the Centre to the Canada Revenue Agency under the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act;









(viii) à un fonctionnaire du Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada, mais uniquement en vue de permettre au Centre d’évaluer l’utilité des renseignements qu’il fournit à l’Agence du revenu du Canada en vertu de la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes;














(2) Subsection 295(5) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (m), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (n) and by adding the following after paragraph (n):









(2) Le paragraphe 295(5) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa n), de ce qui suit :














(o) provide confidential information to a person who has — under a program administered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compliance — entered into a contract to provide information to the Canada Revenue Agency, to the extent necessary to inform the person of any amount they may be entitled to under the contract and of the status of their claim under the contract.









o) fournir des renseignements confidentiels à une personne qui a conclu, dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale, un contrat pour la fourniture de renseignements à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, dans la mesure nécessaire pour informer la personne de tout montant qu’elle pourrait recevoir en vertu du contrat et de l’état de son dossier en vertu du contrat.














(3) Section 295 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (5.03):









(3) L’article 295 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (5.03), de ce qui suit :












Serious offences



(5.04) An official may provide to a law enforcement officer of an appropriate police organization








(a) confidential information, if the official has reasonable grounds to believe that the information will afford evidence of an act or omission in or outside of Canada that, if committed in Canada, would be








(i) an offence under any of








(A) section 3 of the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act,








(B) sections 119 to 121, 123 to 125 and 426 of the Criminal Code,








(C) section 465 of the Criminal Code as it relates to an offence described in clause (B), and








(D) sections 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 and 333.1, paragraphs 334(a) and 348(1)(e) and sections 349, 435 and 462.31 of the Criminal Code,








(ii) a terrorism offence or a criminal organization offence, as those terms are defined in section 2 of the Criminal Code, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more, or








(iii) an offence








(A) that is punishable by a minimum term of imprisonment,








(B) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 14 years or life, or








(C) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years and that








(I) resulted in bodily harm,








(II) involved the import, export, trafficking or production of drugs, or








(III) involved the use of a weapon; and








(b) information setting out the reasonable grounds referred to in paragraph (a), to the extent that any such grounds rely on information referred to in that paragraph.









(5.04) Un fonctionnaire peut fournir les renseignements ci-après à un agent d’exécution de la loi d’une organisation de police compétente :



Infractions graves




a) des renseignements confidentiels, si le fonctionnaire a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’ils constituent des éléments de preuve d’une action ou d’une omission commise au Canada ou à l’étranger qui, si elle était commise au Canada, constituerait :








(i) une infraction prévue à l’une des dispositions suivantes :








(A) l’article 3 de la Loi sur la corruption d’agents publics étrangers,








(B) les articles 119 à 121, 123 à 125 et 426 du Code criminel,








(C) l’article 465 du Code criminel, relativement à une infraction visée à la division (B),








(D) les articles 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 et 333.1, les alinéas 334a) et 348(1)e) et les articles 349, 435 et 462.31 du Code criminel,








(ii) une infraction de terrorisme ou une infraction d’organisation criminelle, au sens de l’article 2 du Code criminel, passible d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans ou plus,








(iii) une infraction passible :








(A) d’une peine minimale d’emprisonnement,








(B) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de quatorze ans ou d’emprisonnement à perpétuité,








(C) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans, et, selon le cas :








(I) dont la perpétration entraîne des lésions corporelles,








(II) qui met en cause l’importation, l’exportation, le trafic ou la production de drogues,








(III) qui met en cause l’usage d’une arme;








b) les renseignements établissant les motifs raisonnables mentionnés à l’alinéa a), dans la mesure où ces motifs sont fondés sur les renseignements visés à cet alinéa.
















51. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 300:









51. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 300, de ce qui suit :












Amount deemed not assessed



300.1 Despite any other provision of this Part, an amount in respect of which particular information relevant to its assessment was provided to the Canada Revenue Agency under a contract entered into by a person under a program administered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compliance is, until the amount is collected by the Minister, deemed for the purpose of any agreement entered into by or on behalf of the Government of Canada under section 8.3 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act not to be payable or remittable under this Part as a result of an assessment.









300.1 Malgré les autres dispositions de la présente partie, tout montant à l’égard duquel des renseignements relatifs à la cotisation le concernant ont été fournis à l’Agence du revenu du Canada aux termes d’un contrat conclu par une personne dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale est réputé, pour l’application d’un accord conclu par le gouvernement du Canada, ou pour son compte, en vertu de l’article 8.3 de la Loi sur les arrangements fiscaux entre le gouvernement fédéral et les provinces, ne pas être à payer ou à verser sous le régime de la présente partie par suite d’une cotisation jusqu’à ce qu’il soit perçu par le ministre.



Cotisation réputée ne pas être établie










2007, c. 29, s. 50(1)



52. (1) The portion of the definition “practitioner” in section 1 of Part II of Schedule V to the Act before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:









52. (1) Le passage de la définition de « praticien » précédant l’alinéa b), à l’article 1 de la partie II de l’annexe V de la même loi, est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 29, par. 50(1)












“practitioner”, in respect of a supply of optom-etric, chiropractic, physiotherapy, chiropodic, podiatric, osteopathic, audiological, speech-language pathology, occupational therapy, psychological, midwifery, dietetic, acupuncture or naturopathic services, means a person who






(a) practises the profession of optometry, chiropractic, physiotherapy, chiropody, podiatry, osteopathy, audiology, speech-language pathology, occupational therapy, psychology, midwifery, dietetics, acupuncture or naturopathy as a naturopathic doctor, as the case may be,









« praticien » Quant à la fourniture de services d’optométrie, de chiropraxie, de physiothérapie, de chiropodie, de podiatrie, d’ostéopathie, d’audiologie, d’orthophonie, d’ergothérapie, de psychologie, de sage-femme, de diététique, d’acupuncture ou de naturopathie, personne qui répond aux conditions suivantes :






a) elle exerce l’optométrie, la chiropraxie, la physiothérapie, la chiropodie, la podiatrie, l’ostéopathie, l’audiologie, l’orthophonie, l’ergothérapie, la psychologie, la profession de sage-femme, la diététique, l’acupuncture ou la naturopathie à titre de docteur en naturopathie, selon le cas;














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after February 11, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 11 février 2014.














53. (1) Section 7 of Part II of Schedule V to the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (j) and by adding the following after paragraph (k):









53. (1) L’article 7 de la partie II de l’annexe V de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa k), de ce qui suit :














(l) acupuncture services; and






(m) naturopathic services.









l) services d’acupuncture;






m) services de naturopathie.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after February 11, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 11 février 2014.












2008, c. 28, s. 84(1)



54. (1) The portion of section 14 of Part II of Schedule V to the Act before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:









54. (1) Le passage de l’article 14 de la partie II de l’annexe V de la même loi précédant l’alinéa b) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 28, par. 84(1)












14. A supply (other than a zero-rated supply or a prescribed supply) of a training service, or of a service of designing a training plan, if






(a) the training is specially designed to assist individuals with a disorder or disability in coping with the effects of the disorder or disability or to alleviate or eliminate those effects and is given or, in the case of a service of designing a training plan, is to be given to a particular individual with the disorder or disability or to another individual who provides personal care or supervision to the particular individual otherwise than in a professional capacity; and









14. La fourniture, sauf la fourniture détaxée ou visée par règlement, d’un service de formation ou d’un service de conception d’un plan de formation si, à la fois :






a) la formation est conçue spécialement pour aider les particuliers ayant un trouble ou une déficience à composer avec ses effets, à les atténuer ou à les éliminer et est donnée ou, dans le cas d’un service de conception d’un plan de formation, sera donnée à un particulier donné ayant un trouble ou une déficience ou à un autre particulier qui prend soin ou assure la surveillance du particulier donné autrement qu’à titre professionnel;












2008, c. 28, s. 84(1)



(2) Subparagraphs 14(b)(i) and (ii) of Part II of Schedule V to the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les sous-alinéas 14b)(i) et (ii) de la partie II de l’annexe V de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 28, par. 84(1)












(i) a person acting in the capacity of a practitioner, medical practitioner, social worker or registered nurse, and in the course of a professional-client relationship between the person and the particular individual, has certified in writing that the training is or, in the case of a service of designing a training plan, will be an appropriate means to assist the particular individual in coping with the effects of the disorder or disability or to alleviate or eliminate those effects,






(ii) a prescribed person, or a member of a prescribed class of persons, has, subject to prescribed circumstances or conditions, certified in writing that the training is or, in the case of a service of designing a training plan, will be an appropriate means to assist the particular individual in coping with the effects of the disorder or disability or to alleviate or eliminate those effects, or









(i) une personne agissant en qualité de praticien, de médecin, de travailleur social ou d’infirmier ou d’infirmière autorisé et dans le cadre d’une relation professionnel-client entre la personne et le particulier donné a attesté par écrit que la formation est ou, dans le cas d’un service de conception d’un plan de formation, sera un moyen approprié d’aider le particulier donné à composer avec les effets du trouble ou de la déficience, à les atténuer ou à les éliminer,






(ii) une personne visée par règlement ou un membre d’une catégorie de personnes visée par règlement a attesté par écrit, compte tenu de circonstances ou conditions visées par règlement, que la formation est ou, dans le cas d’un service de conception d’un plan de formation, sera un moyen approprié d’aider le particulier donné à composer avec les effets du trouble ou de la déficience, à les atténuer ou à les éliminer,














(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to any supply made after February 11, 2014.









(3) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) s’appliquent aux fournitures effectuées après le 11 février 2014.












2008, c. 28, s. 84(1)



55. (1) The portion of section 15 of Part II of Schedule V to the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









55. (1) Le passage de l’article 15 de la partie II de l’annexe V de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 28, par. 84(1)












15. A training service or a service of designing a training plan is not included in section 14 if the training is similar to training ordinarily given to individuals who









15. Un service de formation ou un service de conception d’un plan de formation n’est pas visé à l’article 14 si la formation est semblable à celle qui est habituellement donnée à des particuliers qui, à la fois :














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after February 11, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 11 février 2014.














56. (1) Section 1 of Part V.1 of Schedule V to the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (m), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (n) and by adding the following after paragraph (n):









56. (1) L’article 1 de la partie V.1 de l’annexe V de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa n), de ce qui suit :














(o) a parking space if






(i) the supply is made for consideration by way of lease, licence or similar arrangement in the course of a business carried on by the charity,






(ii) at the time the supply is made, it is reasonable to expect that the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply will be used, during the calendar year in which the supply is made, primarily by individuals who are accessing a property of, or a facility or establishment operated by, a particular person that is a municipality, a school authority, a hospital authority, a public college or a university, and






(iii) any of the following conditions is met:






(A) under the governing documents of the charity, the charity is expected to use a significant part of its income or assets for the benefit of one or more of the particular persons referred to in subparagraph (ii),






(B) the charity and any particular person referred to in subparagraph (ii) have entered into one or more agreements with each other or with other persons in respect of the use by the individuals referred to in subparagraph (ii) of parking spaces in the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply, or






(C) any particular person referred to in subparagraph (ii) performs any function or activity in respect of supplies by the charity of parking spaces in the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply.









o) la fourniture d’une aire de stationnement si, à la fois :






(i) la fourniture est effectuée pour une contrepartie par bail, licence ou accord semblable dans le cadre d’une entreprise exploitée par l’organisme de bienfaisance,






(ii) au moment où la fourniture est effectuée, il est raisonnable de s’attendre à ce que la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture soit utilisée principalement, au cours de l’année civile dans laquelle la fourniture est effectuée, par des particuliers qui se rendent à un bien d’une personne donnée — municipalité, administration scolaire, administration hospitalière, collège public ou université — ou à un établissement exploité par cette personne,






(iii) au moins une des conditions ci-après est remplie :






(A) d’après les statuts régissant l’organisme de bienfaisance, celui-ci utilisera vraisemblablement une partie appréciable de son revenu ou de ses actifs au profit d’une ou de plusieurs des personnes données visées au sous-alinéa (ii),






(B) l’organisme de bienfaisance et une personne donnée visée au sous-alinéa (ii) ont conclu, entre eux ou avec d’autres personnes, un ou plusieurs accords relatifs à l’utilisation par les particuliers visés à ce sous-alinéa d’aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture,






(C) une personne donnée visée au sous-alinéa (ii) accomplit des fonctions, ou exerce des activités, relatives aux fournitures par l’organisme de bienfaisance d’aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after March 21, 2013, except that a supply of a parking space made by a charity after that day and on or before January 24, 2014 is only included in paragraph (o) of section 1 of Part V.1 of Schedule V to the Act, as enacted by subsection (1), if it also meets the following conditions:






(a) the parking space is situated at a particular property for which, at the time the supply is made, it is reasonable to expect that the parking spaces at the particular property will be used, during the calendar year in which the supply is made, primarily by individuals who are accessing a property of, or a facility or establishment operated by, a particular person that is a municipality, a school authority, a hospital authority, a public college or a university; and






(b) any of the following conditions is met:






(i) under the governing documents of the charity, the charity is expected to use a significant part of its income or assets for the benefit of one or more of the particular persons referred to in paragraph (a),






(ii) the charity and any particular person referred to in paragraph (a) have entered into one or more agreements with each other or with other persons in respect of the use of the parking spaces at the particular property by the individuals referred to in that paragraph, or






(iii) any particular person referred to in paragraph (a) performs any function or activity in respect of the supplies by the charity of parking spaces at the partic-ular property.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 21 mars 2013. Toutefois, la fourniture d’une aire de stationnement effectuée par un organisme de bienfaisance après cette date et avant le 25 janvier 2014 n’est incluse à l’alinéa o) de l’article 1 de la partie V.1 de l’annexe V de la même loi, édicté par le paragraphe (1), que si elle remplit également les conditions suivantes :






a) l’aire de stationnement est située dans un bien donné à l’égard duquel il est raisonnable de s’attendre, au moment où la fourniture est effectuée, à ce que les aires de stationnement qui y sont situées soient utilisées principalement, au cours de l’année civile dans laquelle la fourniture est effectuée, par des particuliers qui se rendent à un bien d’une personne donnée — municipalité, administration scolaire, administration hospitalière, collège public ou université — ou à un établissement exploité par cette personne;






b) au moins une des conditions ci-après est remplie :






(i) d’après les statuts régissant l’organisme de bienfaisance, celui-ci utili-sera vraisemblablement une partie appréciable de son revenu ou de ses actifs au profit d’une ou de plusieurs des personnes données visées à l’alinéa a),






(ii) l’organisme de bienfaisance et une personne donnée visée à l’alinéa a) ont conclu, entre eux ou avec d’autres personnes, un ou plusieurs accords relatifs à l’utilisation des aires de stationnement situées dans le bien donné par les particuliers visés à cet alinéa,






(iii) une personne donnée visée à l’alinéa a) accomplit des fonctions, ou exerce des activités, relatives aux fournitures par l’organisme de bienfaisance d’aires de stationnement situées dans le bien donné.












1997, c. 10, s. 102(1)



57. (1) Section 5 of Part V.1 of Schedule V to the Act is replaced by the following:









57. (1) L’article 5 de la partie V.1 de l’annexe V de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1997, ch. 10, par. 102(1)












5. A supply made by a charity of any property or service if all or substantially all of the supplies of the property or service by the charity are made for no consideration, but not including a supply of






(a) blood or blood derivatives; or






(b) a parking space if the supply is made for consideration by way of lease, licence or similar arrangement in the course of a business carried on by the charity.









5. La fourniture par un organisme de bienfaisance de biens ou de services, si la totalité ou la presque totalité de ces fournitures sont effectuées sans contrepartie, à l’exclusion des fournitures suivantes :






a) les fournitures de sang ou de dérivés du sang;






b) les fournitures d’aires de stationnement effectuées pour une contrepartie par bail, licence ou accord semblable dans le cadre d’une entreprise exploitée par l’organisme de bienfaisance.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after March 21, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 21 mars 2013.














58. (1) Part V.1 of Schedule V to the Act is amended by adding the following after section 6:









58. (1) La partie V.1 de l’annexe V de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 6, de ce qui suit :














7. A supply (other than a supply by way of sale) of a parking space in a parking lot made by a charity if






(a) at the time the supply is made, either






(i) all of the parking spaces in the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply are reserved for use by individuals who are accessing a public hospital, or






(ii) it is reasonable to expect that the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply will be used, during the calendar year in which the supply is made, primarily by individuals who are accessing a public hospital;






(b) it is not the case that






(i) all or substantially all of the parking spaces in the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply are reserved for use by persons other than individuals accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity,






(ii) the supply or the amount of the consideration for the supply is conditional on the parking space being used by a person other than an individual accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity, or






(iii) the agreement for the supply is entered into in advance and, under the terms of the agreement for the supply, use of a parking space in the specified parking area (as defined in section 1 of Part VI) in relation to the supply is made available for a total period of time that is more than 24 hours and the use is to be by a person other than an individual accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity; and






(c) no election made by the charity under section 211 of the Act is in effect, in respect of the property on which the parking space is situated, at the time tax would become payable under Part IX of the Act in respect of the supply if it were a taxable supply.









7. La fourniture (sauf la fourniture par vente) d’une aire de stationnement située dans un parc de stationnement, effectuée par un organisme de bienfaisance si, à la fois :






a) au moment où la fourniture est effectuée, l’un ou l’autre des énoncés ci-après se vérifie :






(i) l’ensemble des aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture sont réservées à l’usage de particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public,






(ii) il est raisonnable de s’attendre à ce que la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture soit utilisée principalement, au cours de l’année civile dans laquelle la fourniture est effectuée, par des particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public;






b) il ne s’avère pas :






(i) que la totalité ou la presque totalité des aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture sont réservées à l’usage de personnes autres que des particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel,






(ii) que la fourniture ou le montant de la contrepartie de la fourniture est conditionnel à l’utilisation de l’aire de stationnement par une personne autre qu’un particulier qui se rend à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel,






(iii) que la convention portant sur la fourniture est conclue à l’avance, que, selon les modalités de cette convention, l’utilisation d’une aire de stationnement située dans la zone de stationnement déterminée, au sens de l’article 1 de la partie VI, relative à la fourniture est permise pour une durée totale de plus de vingt-quatre heures et que cette utilisation doit être faite par une personne autre qu’un particulier qui se rend à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel;






c) aucun choix fait par l’organisme de bienfaisance selon l’article 211 de la loi n’est en vigueur, relativement au bien dans lequel l’aire de stationnement est située, au moment où la taxe prévue à la partie IX de la loi deviendrait payable relativement à la fourniture si celle-ci était une fourniture taxable.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after March 21, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 21 mars 2013.














(3) If a charity collected an amount as or on account of tax under Part IX of the Act in respect of a supply of a parking space made by the charity after March 21, 2013 and on or before January 24, 2014 and, by reason of the application of subsection (1), no tax was collectible by the charity in respect of the supply, then, for the purpose of determining the net tax of the charity, the amount is deemed not to have been collected as or on account of tax under Part IX of the Act.









(3) Si un montant au titre de la taxe prévue à la partie IX de la même loi a été perçu par un organisme de bienfaisance relativement à la fourniture d’une aire de stationnement qu’il a effectuée après le 21 mars 2013 et avant le 25 janvier 2014 alors qu’aucune taxe n’était percevable par lui relativement à la fourniture en raison de l’application du paragraphe (1), pour le calcul de la taxe nette de l’organisme, le montant est réputé ne pas avoir été perçu au titre de la taxe prévue à la partie IX de la même loi.














(4) If an amount is deemed not to have been collected by a person as or on account of tax under subsection (3) and that amount was taken into consideration in assessing the net tax of the person under section 296 of the Act for a reporting period of the person, the person is entitled until the day that is one year after the day on which this Act receives royal assent to request in writing that the Minister of National Revenue make an assessment, reassessment or additional assessment for the purpose of taking into account that the amount is deemed not to have been collected by the person as or on account of tax and, on receipt of the request, the Minister must with all due dispatch






(a) consider the request; and






(b) under section 296 of the Act assess, reassess or make an additional assessment of the net tax of the person for any reporting period of the person and of any interest, penalty or other obligation of the person, but only to the extent that the assessment, reassessment or additional assessment may reasonably be regarded as relating to the amount.









(4) Si un montant est réputé, en vertu du paragraphe (3), ne pas avoir été perçu par une personne au titre de la taxe et que ce montant a été pris en compte lors de l’établissement d’une cotisation concernant la taxe nette de la personne en vertu de l’article 296 de la même loi pour une de ses périodes de déclaration, la personne, au plus tard un an après la date de sanction de la présente loi, peut demander par écrit au ministre du Revenu national d’établir une cotisation, une nouvelle cotisation ou une cotisation supplémentaire pour tenir compte du fait que le montant est réputé ne pas avoir été perçu par elle au titre de la taxe. Sur réception de la demande, le ministre, avec diligence :






a) examine la demande;






b) établit, en vertu de l’article 296 de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise, une cotisation, une nouvelle cotisation ou une cotisation supplémentaire concernant la taxe nette de la personne pour toute période de déclaration de celle-ci, et les intérêts, pénalités ou autres obligations de la personne, mais seulement dans la mesure où il est raisonnable de considérer que la cotisation a trait au montant.














59. (1) Section 1 of Part VI of Schedule V to the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









59. (1) L’article 1 de la partie VI de l’annexe V de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :














“specified parking area” in relation to a supply of a parking space means all of the parking spaces that could be chosen for use in parking under the agreement for the supply of the parking space if all of those parking spaces were vacant and none were reserved for specific users;









« zone de stationnement déterminée » Relativement à la fourniture d’une aire de stationnement, l’ensemble des aires de stationnement qui pourraient être choisies pour le stationnement selon la convention portant sur la fourniture de l’aire de stationnement si l’ensemble de ces aires de stationnement étaient inoccupées et qu’aucune d’elles n’était réservée à des utilisateurs particuliers.














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on March 21, 2013.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 21 mars 2013.














60. (1) Part VI of Schedule V to the Act is amended by adding the following after section 25:









60. (1) La partie VI de l’annexe V de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 25, de ce qui suit :














25.1 A supply (other than a supply by way of sale) of a parking space in a parking lot made by a public sector body if






(a) at the time the supply is made, either






(i) all of the parking spaces in the specified parking area in relation to the supply are reserved for use by individuals who are accessing a public hospital, or






(ii) it is reasonable to expect that the specified parking area in relation to the supply will be used, during the calendar year in which the supply is made, primarily by individuals who are accessing a public hospital;






(b) it is not the case that






(i) all or substantially all of the parking spaces in the specified parking area in relation to the supply are reserved for use by persons other than individuals accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity,






(ii) the supply or the amount of the consideration for the supply is conditional on the parking space being used by a person other than an individual accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity, or






(iii) the agreement for the supply is entered into in advance and, under the terms of the agreement for the supply, use of a parking space in the specified parking area in relation to the supply is made available for a total period of time that is more than 24 hours and the use is to be by a person other than an individual accessing a public hospital otherwise than in a professional capacity; and






(c) no election made by the public sector body under section 211 of the Act is in effect, in respect of the property on which the parking space is situated, at the time tax would become payable under Part IX of the Act in respect of the supply if it were a taxable supply.









25.1 La fourniture (sauf la fourniture par vente) d’une aire de stationnement située dans un parc de stationnement, effectuée par un organisme du secteur public si, à la fois :






a) au moment où la fourniture est effectuée, l’un ou l’autre des énoncés ci-après se vérifie :






(i) l’ensemble des aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée relative à la fourniture sont réservées à l’usage de particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public,






(ii) il est raisonnable de s’attendre à ce que la zone de stationnement déterminée relative à la fourniture soit utilisée principalement, au cours de l’année civile dans laquelle la fourniture est effectuée, par des particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public;






b) il ne s’avère pas :






(i) que la totalité ou la presque totalité des aires de stationnement situées dans la zone de stationnement déterminée relative à la fourniture sont réservées à l’usage de personnes autres que des particuliers qui se rendent à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel,






(ii) que la fourniture ou le montant de la contrepartie de la fourniture est conditionnel à l’utilisation de l’aire de stationnement par une personne autre qu’un particulier qui se rend à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel,






(iii) que la convention portant sur la fourniture est conclue à l’avance, que, selon les modalités de cette convention, l’utilisation d’une aire de stationnement située dans la zone de stationnement déterminée relative à la fourniture est permise pour une durée totale de plus de vingt-quatre heures et que cette utilisation doit être faite par une personne autre qu’un particulier qui se rend à un hôpital public autrement qu’à titre professionnel;






c) aucun choix fait par l’organisme du secteur public selon l’article 211 de la loi n’est en vigueur, relativement au bien dans lequel l’aire de stationnement est située, au moment où la taxe prévue à la partie IX de la loi deviendrait payable relativement à la fourniture si celle-ci était une fourniture taxable.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after January 24, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 24 janvier 2014.














61. (1) Part II of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by adding the following after section 9:









61. (1) La partie II de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 9, de ce qui suit :














9.1 A supply of eyewear that is specially designed to treat or correct a defect of vision by electronic means, if the eyewear is supplied on the written order of a person that is entitled under the laws of a province to practise the profession of medicine or optometry for the treatment or correction of a defect of vision of a consumer who is named in the order.









9.1 La fourniture d’un appareil d’optique qui est conçu spécialement pour traiter ou corriger un trouble visuel par voie électronique, si l’appareil est fourni sur l’ordonnance écrite d’une personne autorisée par la législation provinciale à exercer la profession de médecin ou d’optométriste pour le traitement ou la correction d’un trouble visuel du consommateur nommé dans l’ordonnance.














(2) Subsection (1) applies to any supply made after February 11, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux fournitures effectuées après le 11 février 2014.














PART 3









PARTIE 3












AMENDMENTS TO THE EXCISE ACT, 2001, THE EXCISE TAX ACT (OTHER THAN GST/HST MEASURES) AND THE AIR TRAVELLERS SECURITY CHARGE ACT









MODIFICATION DE LA LOI DE 2001 SUR L’ACCISE, DE LA LOI SUR LA TAXE D’ACCISE (SAUF LES DISPOSITIONS CONCERNANT LA TPS/TVH) ET DE LA LOI SUR LE DROIT POUR LA SÉCURITÉ DES PASSAGERS DU TRANSPORT AÉRIEN










2002, c. 22



Excise Act, 2001









Loi de 2001 sur l’accise



2002, ch. 22










Amendments to the Act









Modification de la loi














62. (1) The portion of subsection 42(1) of the French version of the Excise Act, 2001 before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









62. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 42(1) de la version française de la Loi de 2001 sur l’accise précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Imposition



42. (1) Un droit sur les produits du tabac fabriqués au Canada ou importés et sur le tabac en feuilles importé est imposé aux taux prévus à l’annexe 1 et est exigible :









42. (1) Un droit sur les produits du tabac fabriqués au Canada ou importés et sur le tabac en feuilles importé est imposé aux taux prévus à l’annexe 1 et est exigible :



Imposition












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














63. (1) The portion of section 43 of the French version of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









63. (1) Le passage de l’article 43 de la version française de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Droit additionnel sur les cigares



43. Est imposé aux taux prévus à l’annexe 2, en plus du droit imposé en vertu de l’article 42, un droit sur les cigares qui sont fabriqués et vendus au Canada ou importés. Ce droit est exigible :









43. Est imposé aux taux prévus à l’annexe 2, en plus du droit imposé en vertu de l’article 42, un droit sur les cigares qui sont fabriqués et vendus au Canada ou importés. Ce droit est exigible :



Droit additionnel sur les cigares












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














64. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 43:









64. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 43, de ce qui suit :












Definition of “inflationary adjusted year”



43.1 (1) In this section, “inflationary adjusted year” means 2019 and every fifth year after that year.









43.1 (1) Au présent article, « année inflationniste » s’entend de 2019 et de chacune des cinquièmes années suivantes.



Définition de « année inflationniste »










Adjustments



(2) Each rate of duty set out in sections 1 to 4 of Schedule 1 and paragraph (a) of Schedule 2 in respect of a tobacco product is to be adjusted on December 1 of a particular inflationary adjusted year so that the rate is equal to the greater of








(a) the rate determined by the formula








 A × B








where








A      is the rate of duty applicable to the tobacco product on November 30 of the particular inflationary adjusted year, and








B      is the amount determined by the formula in subparagraph (i) or (ii), rounded to the nearest one-thousandth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-thousandths, rounded to the higher one-thousandth,








(i) if the particular inflationary adjusted year is 2019,








    C/D








where








C      is the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending on September 30, 2019, and








D      is the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period that ended on September 30, 2013,








(ii) for any other particular inflationary adjusted year,








    E/F








where








E      is the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the particular inflationary adjusted year, and








F      is the Consumer Price Index for the 12-month period ending on September 30 of the inflationary adjusted year that precedes the particular inflationary adjusted year; and








(b) the rate of duty referred to in the description of A in paragraph (a).









(2) Chacun des taux de droit prévus aux articles 1 à 4 de l’annexe 1 et à l’alinéa a) de l’annexe 2 relativement à un produit du tabac est ajusté le 1er décembre d’une année inflationniste donnée de façon à ce qu’il s’établisse au plus élevé des taux suivants :



Ajustements




a) le taux obtenu par la formule suivante :








 A × B








où :








A      représente le taux de droit applicable au produit du tabac le 30 novembre de l’année inflationniste donnée,








B      la somme — arrêtée à la troisième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en quatrième décimale étant arrondis à la troisième décimale supérieure — obtenue par celle des formules ci-après qui est applicable :








(i) si l’année inflationniste donnée est 2019 :








    C/D








où :








C      représente l’indice des prix à la consommation pour la période de douze mois se terminant le 30 septembre 2019,








D      l’indice des prix à la consommation pour la période de douze mois s’étant terminée le 30 septembre 2013,








(ii) pour toute autre année inflationniste donnée :








    E/F








où :








E      représente l’indice des prix à la consommation pour la période de douze mois se terminant le 30 septembre de l’année inflationniste donnée,








F      l’indice des prix à la consommation pour la période de douze mois se terminant le 30 septembre de l’année inflationniste qui précède l’année inflationniste donnée;








b) le taux de droit visé à l’élément A de la formule figurant à l’alinéa a).














Rounding



(3) The adjusted rate determined under subsection (2) is to be rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth or, if the adjusted rate is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth.









(3) Le taux ajusté déterminé selon le paragraphe (2) est arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure.



Arrondissement










Consumer Price Index



(4) In this section, the Consumer Price Index for any 12-month period is the result arrived at by








(a) aggregating the Consumer Price Index for Canada, as published by Statistics Canada under the authority of the Statistics Act, for each month in that period;








(b) dividing the aggregate obtained under paragraph (a) by 12; and








(c) rounding the result obtained under paragraph (b) to the nearest one-thousandth or, if the result obtained is equidistant from two consecutive one-thousandths, to the higher one-thousandth.









(4) Au présent article, l’indice des prix à la consommation pour une période de douze mois est obtenu par :



Indice des prix à la consommation




a) l’addition des indices mensuels des prix à la consommation de la période pour le Canada, publiés par Statistique Canada en application de la Loi sur la statistique;








b) la division de ce total par douze;








c) l’arrêt du quotient ainsi obtenu à la troisième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en quatrième décimale étant arrondis à la troisième décimale supérieure.
















(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2008, c. 28, s. 56(1)



65. (1) Subsection 53(1) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









65. (1) Le paragraphe 53(1) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 28, par. 56(1)










Droit spécial sur le tabac fabriqué importé livré à une boutique hors taxes



53. (1) Un droit spécial est imposé, aux taux prévus à l’article 1 de l’annexe 3, sur le tabac fabriqué importé qui est livré à une boutique hors taxes et qui n’est pas estampillé.









53. (1) Un droit spécial est imposé, aux taux prévus à l’article 1 de l’annexe 3, sur le tabac fabriqué importé qui est livré à une boutique hors taxes et qui n’est pas estampillé.



Droit spécial sur le tabac fabriqué importé livré à une boutique hors taxes












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














66. (1) Subsection 54(2) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









66. (1) Le paragraphe 54(2) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Droit spécial sur le tabac du voyageur



(2) Un droit spécial est imposé, aux taux prévus à l’article 2 de l’annexe 3, sur le tabac du voyageur au moment de son importation.









(2) Un droit spécial est imposé, aux taux prévus à l’article 2 de l’annexe 3, sur le tabac du voyageur au moment de son importation.



Droit spécial sur le tabac du voyageur












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














67. (1) Paragraphs 56(1)(a) and (b) of the French version of the Act are replaced by the following:









67. (1) Les alinéas 56(1)a) et b) de la version française de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














a) si l’exportation est effectuée conformément à l’alinéa 50(4)a) par le titulaire de licence de tabac qui a fabriqué les produits, les taux prévus à l’article 3 de l’annexe 3;






b) sinon, les taux prévus à l’article 4 de l’annexe 3.









a) si l’exportation est effectuée conformément à l’alinéa 50(4)a) par le titulaire de licence de tabac qui a fabriqué les produits, les taux prévus à l’article 3 de l’annexe 3;






b) sinon, les taux prévus à l’article 4 de l’annexe 3.














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2006, c. 4, s. 34(1)



68. (1) The heading “TOBACCO PROD-UCTS INVENTORY TAX” before section 58.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









68. (1) L’intertitre « TAXE SUR LES STOCKS DE PRODUITS DU TABAC » précédant l’article 58.1 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 4, par. 34(1)










CIGARETTE INVENTORY TAX









TAXE SUR LES STOCKS DE CIGARETTES














(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2006, c. 4, s. 34(1); 2007, c. 35, s. 197(1)



69. (1) The definitions “loose tobacco”, “taxed tobacco” and “unit” in section 58.1 of the Act are repealed.









69. (1) Les définitions de « tabac à cigarettes », « tabac imposé » et « unité », à l’article 58.1 de la même loi, sont abrogées.



2006, ch. 4, par. 34(1); 2007, ch. 35, par. 197(1)












(2) Section 58.1 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(2) L’article 58.1 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :












“adjustment day”« date d’ajustement »



“adjustment day” means








(a) February 12, 2014; or








(b) in the case of an inflationary adjusted year, December 1 of that year.




“inflationary adjusted year”« année inflationniste »



“inflationary adjusted year” has the same meaning as in subsection 43.1(1).




“taxed cigarettes”« cigarettes imposées »



“taxed cigarettes” of a person means cigarettes in respect of which duty has been imposed under section 42 before February 12, 2014 at the rate set out in paragraph 1(b) of Schedule 1, as that provision read on February 11, 2014, and that, at the beginning of February 12, 2014,








(a) were owned by that person for sale in the ordinary course of a business of the person;








(b) were not held in a vending machine; and








(c) were not relieved from that duty under this Act.









« année inflationniste » S’entend au sens du paragraphe 43.1(1).



« année inflationniste »“inflationary adjusted year”




« cigarettes imposées » Cigarettes sur lesquelles le droit prévu à l’article 42 a été imposé avant le 12 février 2014 au taux figurant à l’alinéa 1b) de l’annexe 1, en son état le 11 février 2014, et qui, à zéro heure le 12 février 2014, à la fois :



« cigarettes imposées »“taxed cigarettes”




a) étaient offertes en vente dans le cours normal des activités de leur propriétaire;








b) n’étaient pas offertes en vente par distributeur automatique;








c) n’étaient pas exonérées de ce droit en vertu de la présente loi.








« date d’ajustement » 



« date d’ajustement »“adjustment day”




a) Le 12 février 2014;








b) dans le cas d’une année inflationniste, le 1er décembre de cette année.
















(3) The portion of the definition “taxed cigarettes” in section 58.1 of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(3) Le passage de la définition de « cigarettes imposées » précédant l’alinéa a), à l’article 58.1 de la même loi, est remplacé par ce qui suit :












“taxed cigarettes”« cigarettes imposées »



“taxed cigarettes” of a person means cigarettes in respect of which duty has been imposed under section 42 or 53 at the rate applicable on the day before an adjustment day other than February 12, 2014, and that, at the beginning of the adjustment day,









« cigarettes imposées » Cigarettes sur lesquelles le droit prévu aux articles 42 ou 53 a été imposé au taux applicable la veille d’une date d’ajustement autre que le 12 février 2014 et qui, à zéro heure à la date d’ajustement, à la fois :



« cigarettes imposées »“taxed cigarettes”












(4) Subsections (1) and (2) are deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(4) Les paragraphes (1) et (2) sont réputés être entrés en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














(5) Subsection (3) comes into force on November 30, 2019.









(5) Le paragraphe (3) entre en vigueur le 30 novembre 2019.












2006, c. 4, s. 34(1); 2007, c. 35, ss. 198(1) and 199(1)



70. (1) Sections 58.2 to 58.4 of the Act are replaced by the following:









70. (1) Les articles 58.2 à 58.4 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 4, par. 34(1); 2007, ch. 35, par. 198(1) et 199(1)










Imposition of tax — 2014 increase



58.2 (1) Subject to section 58.3, every person shall pay to Her Majesty a tax on all taxed cigarettes of the person held at the beginning of February 12, 2014 at the rate of $0.02015 per cigarette.









58.2 (1) Sous réserve de l’article 58.3, toute personne est tenue de payer à Sa Majesté une taxe sur les cigarettes imposées de la personne détenues à zéro heure le 12 février 2014 au taux de 0,020 15 $ par cigarette.



Assujettissement— majoration de 2014










Imposition of tax — inflationary adjusted years



(2) Subject to section 58.3, every person shall pay to Her Majesty a tax on all taxed cigarettes of the person held at the beginning of December 1 of an inflationary adjusted year at a rate per cigarette equal to








(a) in the case of cigarettes in respect of which duty has been imposed under section 42, the amount determined by the formula








(A – B)/5








where








A      is the rate of duty applicable under paragraph 1(b) of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes on December 1 of the inflationary adjusted year, and








B      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes on November 30 of the inflationary adjusted year; and








(b) in the case of cigarettes in respect of which duty has been imposed under section 53, the amount determined by the formula








C – D








where








C      is the rate of duty applicable under paragraph 1(a) of Schedule 3 per cigarette on December 1 of the inflationary adjusted year, and








D      is the rate of duty applicable under paragraph 1(a) of Schedule 3 per cigarette on November 30 of the inflationary adjusted year.









(2) Sous réserve de l’article 58.3, toute personne est tenue de payer à Sa Majesté une taxe sur les cigarettes imposées de la personne détenues à zéro heure le 1er décembre d’une année inflationniste au taux, par cigarette, obtenu par celle des formules ci-après qui est applicable :



Assujettissement — années inflationnistes




a) s’agissant de cigarettes sur lesquelles le droit prévu à l’article 42 a été imposé :








(A – B)/5








où :








A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes le 1er décembre de l’année inflationniste, prévu à l’alinéa 1b) de l’annexe 1,








B      le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes le 30 novembre de l’année inflationniste, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1;








b) s’agissant de cigarettes sur lesquelles le droit prévu à l’article 53 a été imposé :








C – D








où :








C      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque cigarette le 1er décembre de l’année inflationniste, prévu à l’alinéa 1a) de l’annexe 3,








D      le taux de droit applicable à chaque cigarette le 30 novembre de l’année inflationniste, prévu à l’alinéa 1a) de l’annexe 3.














Rounding



(3) The amount determined under paragraph (2)(a) or (b) is to be rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth or, if the amount is equidis-tant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth.









(3) Le résultat obtenu en application des alinéas (2)a) ou b) est arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure.



Arrondissement










Exemption for small retail inventory



58.3 Tax under this Part in respect of the inventory of all taxed cigarettes of a person that is held at the beginning of an adjustment day at a separate retail establishment of the person is not payable if that retail establishment holds inventory of 30,000 or fewer cigarettes.









58.3 La taxe prévue par la présente partie n’est pas exigible sur les stocks de cigarettes imposées qu’un exploitant détient à zéro heure à une date d’ajustement dans son établissement de détail distinct si ces stocks n’excèdent pas 30 000 cigarettes.



Exemption pour petits détaillants










Taking of inventory



58.4 Every person liable to pay tax under this Part shall, for the purposes of this Part, determine that person’s inventory of all taxed cigarettes held at the beginning of an adjustment day.









58.4 Pour l’application de la présente partie, le redevable de la taxe prévue par cette partie est tenu de faire l’inventaire de ses cigarettes imposées détenues à zéro heure à une date d’ajustement.



Inventaire












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2007, c. 35, s. 200(1)



71. (1) Subsection 58.5(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









71. (1) Le paragraphe 58.5(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 200(1)










Returns



58.5 (1) Every person liable to pay tax under this Part shall file a return with the Minister in the prescribed form and manner on or before,








(a) in the case of the tax imposed under subsection 58.2(1), April 30, 2014; or








(b) in any other case, the last day of the month following December of an inflationary adjusted year.









58.5 (1) Tout redevable de la taxe prévue par la présente partie est tenu de présenter une déclaration au ministre, en la forme et selon les modalités autorisées par celui-ci, au plus tard :



Déclaration




a) le 30 avril 2014, s’il s’agit de la taxe imposée en vertu du paragraphe 58.2(1);








b) le dernier jour du mois suivant décembre d’une année inflationniste, dans les autres cas.
















(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2007, c. 35, s. 201(1)



72. (1) Subsection 58.6(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









72. (1) Le paragraphe 58.6(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 201(1)










Payment



58.6 (1) Every person shall pay to the Receiver General the total tax payable by the person under this Part on or before








(a) in the case of the tax imposed under subsection 58.2(1), April 30, 2014; or








(b) in any other case, the last day of the month following December of an inflationary adjusted year.









58.6 (1) Toute personne est tenue de verser au receveur général le total de la taxe dont elle est redevable en vertu de la présente partie, au plus tard :



Paiement




a) le 30 avril 2014, s’il s’agit de la taxe imposée en vertu du paragraphe 58.2(1);








b) le dernier jour du mois suivant décembre d’une année inflationniste, dans les autres cas.
















(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2008, c. 28, s. 58(1)



73. (1) Section 180.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









73. (1) L’article 180.1 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 28, par. 58(1)










Refund — imported black stock tobacco



180.1 (1) The Minister may refund to a person who has imported manufactured tobacco an amount determined in accordance with subsection (2) in respect of the tobacco if








(a) the person provides evidence satisfactory to the Minister that








(i) duty was imposed on the tobacco under section 42 at a rate set out in paragraph 1(b), 2(b) or 3(b) of Schedule 1, as those paragraphs read on February 11, 2014, and paid, and








(ii) the tobacco was black stock








(A) that was delivered to a duty free shop or customs bonded warehouse, or to a person for use as ships’ stores in accordance with the Ships’ Stores Regulations, before February 12, 2014, or








(B) that was exported before February 12, 2014 for delivery to a foreign duty free shop or as foreign ships’ stores; and








(b) the person applies to the Minister for the refund within two years after the tobacco was imported.









180.1 (1) Le ministre peut rembourser à la personne qui a importé du tabac fabriqué la somme déterminée selon le paragraphe (2) relativement au tabac si, à la fois :



Remboursement — tabac non ciblé importé




a) la personne fournit au ministre une preuve, agréée par celui-ci, des faits suivants :








(i) le droit imposé sur le tabac en vertu de l’article 42, au taux fixé aux alinéas 1b), 2b) ou 3b) de l’annexe 1, en leur état le 11 février 2014, a été acquitté,








(ii) il s’agit de tabac non ciblé qui :








(A) a été livré à une boutique hors taxes ou à un entrepôt de stockage, ou à une personne pour utilisation à titre de provisions de bord conformément au Règlement sur les provisions de bord, avant le 12 février 2014,








(B) a été exporté avant le 12 février 2014 pour livraison à une boutique hors taxes à l’étranger ou à titre de provisions de bord à l’étranger;








b) la personne demande le remboursement au ministre dans les deux ans suivant l’importation du tabac.














Determination of refund



(2) The amount of the refund is equal to the amount by which








(a) the duty referred to in subparagraph (1)(a)(i)








exceeds








(b) the duty that would have been imposed under section 42 on the tobacco if the applicable rate of duty had been the rate set out in paragraph 1(a), 2(a) or 3(a) of Schedule 1, as those paragraphs read on February 11, 2014.









(2) Le montant du remboursement est égal à l’excédent du droit visé à l’alinéa a) sur le droit visé à l’alinéa b) :



Montant du remboursement




a) le droit visé au sous-alinéa (1)a)(i);








b) le droit qui aurait été imposé sur le tabac en vertu de l’article 42 si le taux de droit applicable avait été celui fixé aux alinéas 1a), 2a) ou 3a) de l’annexe 1, en leur état le 11 février 2014.
















(2) Section 180.1 of the Act is repealed.









(2) L’article 180.1 de la même loi est abrogé.














(3) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














(4) Subsection (2) comes into force on February 12, 2016.









(4) Le paragraphe (2) entre en vigueur le 12 février 2016.














74. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 207:









74. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 207, de ce qui suit :












Electronic funds transfer



207.1 For greater certainty, information obtained by the Minister under Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act may be used for the purposes of this Act.









207.1 Il est entendu que les renseignements obtenus par le ministre sous le régime de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu peuvent être utilisés pour l’application de la présente loi.



Télévirement












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














75. (1) Paragraph 211(6)(e) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (vi), by adding “or” at the end of subparagraph (vii) and by adding the following after subparagraph (vii):









75. (1) L’alinéa 211(6)e) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le sous-alinéa (vii), de ce qui suit :














(viii) to an official of the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada solely for the purpose of enabling the Centre to evaluate the usefulness of information provided by the Centre to the Canada Revenue Agency under the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act;









(viii) à un fonctionnaire du Centre d’analyse des opérations et déclarations financières du Canada, mais uniquement en vue de permettre au Centre d’évaluer l’utilité des renseignements qu’il fournit à l’Agence du revenu du Canada en vertu de la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes;














(2) Subsection 211(6) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (l), by adding “or’’ at the end of paragraph (m) and by adding the following after paragraph (m):









(2) Le paragraphe 211(6) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa m), de ce qui suit :














(n) provide confidential information to a person who has — under a program ad-ministered by the Canada Revenue Agency to obtain information relating to tax non-compliance — entered into a contract to provide information to the Canada Revenue Agency, to the extent necessary to inform the person of any amount they may be entitled to under the contract and of the status of their claim under the contract.









n) fournir des renseignements confidentiels à une personne qui a conclu, dans le cadre d’un programme administré par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qui permet d’obtenir des renseignements concernant l’inobservation fiscale, un contrat pour la fourniture de renseignements à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, dans la mesure nécessaire pour informer la personne de toute somme qu’elle pourrait recevoir en vertu du contrat et de l’état de son dossier en vertu du contrat.














(3) Section 211 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (6.3):









(3) L’article 211 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (6.3), de ce qui suit :












Serious offences



(6.4) An official may provide to a law enforcement officer of an appropriate police organization








(a) confidential information, if the official has reasonable grounds to believe that the information will afford evidence of an act or omission in or outside of Canada that, if committed in Canada, would be








(i) an offence under any of








(A) section 3 of the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act,








(B) sections 119 to 121, 123 to 125 and 426 of the Criminal Code,








(C) section 465 of the Criminal Code as it relates to an offence described in clause (B), and








(D) sections 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 and 333.1, paragraphs 334(a) and 348(1)(e) and sections 349, 435 and 462.31 of the Criminal Code,








(ii) a terrorism offence or a criminal organization offence, as those terms are defined in section 2 of the Criminal Code, for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years or more, or








(iii) an offence








(A) that is punishable by minimum term of imprisonment,








(B) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 14 years or life, or








(C) for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years and that








(I) resulted in bodily harm,








(II) involved the import, export, trafficking or production of drugs, or








(III) involved the use of a weapon; and








(b) information setting out the reasonable grounds referred to in paragraph (a), to the extent that any such grounds rely on information referred to in that paragraph.









(6.4) Un fonctionnaire peut fournir les renseignements ci-après à un agent d’exécution de la loi d’une organisation de police compétente :



Infractions graves




a) des renseignements confidentiels, si le fonctionnaire a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’ils constituent des éléments de preuve d’une action ou d’une omission commise au Canada ou à l’étranger qui, si elle était commise au Canada, constituerait :








(i) une infraction prévue à l’une des dispositions suivantes :








(A) l’article 3 de la Loi sur la corruption d’agents publics étrangers,








(B) les articles 119 à 121, 123 à 125 et 426 du Code criminel,








(C) l’article 465 du Code criminel, relativement à une infraction visée à la division (B),








(D) les articles 144, 264, 271, 279, 279.02, 281 et 333.1, les alinéas 334a) et 348(1)e) et les articles 349, 435 et 462.31 du Code criminel,








(ii) une infraction de terrorisme ou une infraction d’organisation criminelle, au sens de l’article 2 du Code criminel, passible d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans ou plus,








(iii) une infraction passible :








(A) d’une peine minimale d’emprisonnement,








(B) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de quatorze ans ou d’emprisonnement à perpétuité,








(C) d’une peine maximale d’emprisonnement de dix ans, et, selon le cas :








(I) dont la perpétration entraîne des lésions corporelles,








(II) qui met en cause l’importation, l’exportation, le trafic ou la production de drogues,








(III) qui met en cause l’usage d’une arme;








b) les renseignements établissant les motifs raisonnables mentionnés à l’alinéa a), dans la mesure où ces motifs sont fondés sur les renseignements visés à cet alinéa.














2007, c. 35, s. 202(1); 2008, c. 28, s. 61(1); 2013, c. 33, s. 54(1)



76. (1) Paragraph 216(2)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









76. (1) L’alinéa 216(2)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 202(1); 2008, ch. 28, par. 61(1); 2013, ch. 33, par. 54(1)












(a) the total of






(i) $0.21 multiplied by the number of cigarettes to which the offence relates,






(ii) $0.21 multiplied by the number of tobacco sticks to which the offence relates,






(iii) $0.26 multiplied by the number of grams of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks to which the offence relates, and






(iv) $0.41 multiplied by the number of cigars to which the offence relates, and









a) le total des produits suivants :






(i) le produit de 0,21 $ par le nombre de cigarettes auxquelles l’infraction se rapporte,






(ii) le produit de 0,21 $ par le nombre de bâtonnets de tabac auxquels l’infraction se rapporte,






(iii) le produit de 0,26 $ par le nombre de grammes de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, auxquels l’infraction se rapporte,






(iv) le produit de 0,41 $ par le nombre de cigares auxquels l’infraction se rapporte;














(2) Paragraph 216(2)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 216(2)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) the total of






(i) in the case of cigarettes, the number of cigarettes to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  (A/5) × 2






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes at the time the offence was committed,






(ii) in the case of tobacco sticks, the number of tobacco sticks to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  B × 2






where






B      is the rate of duty applicable under section 2 of Schedule 1 per tobacco stick at the time the offence was committed,






(iii) in the case of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks, the number of grams of manufactured tobacco to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  (C/50) × 2






where






C      is the rate of duty applicable under section 3 of Schedule 1 per 50 grams at the time the offence was committed, and






(iv) in the case of cigars, the number of cigars to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidis- tant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  D × 5






where






D      is the rate of duty applicable under paragraph (a) of Schedule 2 per cigar at the time the offence was committed, and









a) le total des produits suivants :






(i) s’agissant de cigarettes, le nombre de cigarettes auxquelles l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  (A/5) × 2






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1,






(ii) s’agissant de bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de bâtonnets de tabac auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  B × 2






où :






B      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque bâtonnet de tabac au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1,






(iii) s’agissant de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de grammes de tabac fabriqué auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  (C/50) × 2






où :






C      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de 50 grammes au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1,






(iv) s’agissant de cigares, le nombre de cigares auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  D × 5






où :






D      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque cigare au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’alinéa a) de l’annexe 2;












2007, c. 35, s. 202(2); 2008, c. 28, s. 61(2); 2013, c. 33, s. 54(2)



(3) Paragraph 216(3)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 216(3)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 202(2); 2008, ch. 28, par. 61(2); 2013, ch. 33, par. 54(2)












(a) the total of






(i) $0.32 multiplied by the number of cigarettes to which the offence relates,






(ii) $0.32 multiplied by the number of tobacco sticks to which the offence relates,






(iii) $0.39 multiplied by the number of grams of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks to which the offence relates, and






(iv) $0.82 multiplied by the number of cigars to which the offence relates, and









a) le total des produits suivants :






(i) le produit de 0,32 $ par le nombre de cigarettes auxquelles l’infraction se rapporte,






(ii) le produit de 0,32 $ par le nombre de bâtonnets de tabac auxquels l’infraction se rapporte,






(iii) le produit de 0,39 $ par le nombre de grammes de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, auxquels l’infraction se rapporte,






(iv) le produit de 0,82 $ par le nombre de cigares auxquels l’infraction se rapporte;














(4) Paragraph 216(3)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) L’alinéa 216(3)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) the total of






(i) in the case of cigarettes, the number of cigarettes to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  (A/5) × 3






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes at the time the offence was committed,






(ii) in the case of tobacco sticks, the number of tobacco sticks to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  B × 3






where






B      is the rate of duty applicable under section 2 of Schedule 1 per tobacco stick at the time the offence was committed,






(iii) in the case of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks, the number of grams of manufactured tobacco to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  (C/50) × 3






where






C      is the rate of duty applicable under section 3 of Schedule 1 per 50 grams at the time the offence was committed, and






(iv) in the case of cigars, the number of cigars to which the offence relates multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidis- tant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






  D × 10






where






D      is the rate of duty applicable under paragraph (a) of Schedule 2 per cigar that applied at the time the offence was committed, and









a) le total des produits suivants :






(i) s’agissant de cigarettes, le nombre de cigarettes auxquelles l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  (A/5) × 3






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1,






(ii) s’agissant de bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de bâtonnets de tabac auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  B × 3






où :






B      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque bâtonnet de tabac au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1,






(iii) s’agissant de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de grammes de tabac fabriqué auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  (C/50) × 3






où :






C      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de 50 grammes au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1,






(iv) s’agissant de cigares, le nombre de cigares auxquels l’infraction se rapporte par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  D × 10






où :






D      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque cigare au moment de l’infraction, prévu à l’alinéa a) de l’annexe 2;














(5) Subsections (2) and (4) come into force on December 1, 2019.









(5) Les paragraphes (2) et (4) entrent en vigueur le 1er décembre 2019.












2007, c. 18, s. 122



77. (1) Section 236 of the Act is repealed.









77. (1) L’article 236 de la même loi est abrogé.



2007, ch. 18, art. 122












(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.












2007, c. 35, s. 203(1); 2008, c. 28, s. 62; 2013, c. 33, s. 55



78. (1) Paragraphs 240(a) to (c) of the Act are replaced by the following:









78. (1) Les alinéas 240a) à c) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 203(1); 2008, ch. 28, art. 62; 2013, ch. 33, art. 55












(a) $0.40 per cigarette that was removed in contravention of that subsection,






(b) $0.40 per tobacco stick that was removed in contravention of that subsection, and






(c) $502.19 per kilogram of manufactured tobacco, other than cigarettes and tobacco sticks, that was removed in contravention of that subsection.









a) 0,40 $ par cigarette retirée en contravention avec ce paragraphe;






b) 0,40 $ par bâtonnet de tabac retiré en contravention avec ce paragraphe;






c) 502,19 $ par kilogramme de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, retiré en contravention avec ce paragraphe.














(2) Paragraphs 240(a) to (c) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les alinéas 240a) à c) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














(a) in the case of cigarettes, the number of cigarettes that were removed in contravention of that subsection multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






(A/5 + B) × 2






where






A      is the rate of duty set out in section 1 of Schedule 1 that applied at the time the cigarettes were removed, and






B      is the rate of duty set out in paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 3 that applied at the time the cigarettes were removed,






(b) in the case of tobacco sticks, the number of tobacco sticks that were removed in contravention of that subsection multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






(C + D) × 2






where






C      is the rate of duty set out in section 2 of Schedule 1 that applied at the time the tobacco sticks were removed, and






D      is the rate of duty set out in paragraph 4(b) of Schedule 3 that applied at the time the tobacco sticks were removed, and






(c) in the case of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes and tobacco sticks, the number of kilograms of manufactured tobacco that were removed in contravention of that subsection multiplied by the amount, rounded to the nearest one-hundredth, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundredths, rounded to the higher one-hundredth, determined by the formula






(E + F) × 40






where






E      is the rate of duty set out in section 3 of Schedule 1 that applied at the time the manufactured tobacco was removed, and






F      is the rate of duty set out in paragraph 4(c) of Schedule 3 that applied at the time the manufactured tobacco was removed.









a) s’agissant de cigarettes, le nombre de cigarettes retirées en contravention avec ce paragraphe par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






(A/5 + B) × 2






où :






A      représente le taux de droit prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait des cigarettes,






B      le taux de droit prévu à l’alinéa 4a) de l’annexe 3 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait des cigarettes;






b) s’agissant de bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de bâtonnets de tabac retirés en contravention avec ce paragraphe par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






(C + D) × 2






où :






C      représente le taux de droit prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait des bâtonnets de tabac,






D      le taux de droit prévu à l’alinéa 4b) de l’annexe 3 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait des bâtonnets de tabac;






c) s’agissant de tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le nombre de kilogrammes de tabac fabriqué retirés en contravention avec ce paragraphe par la somme — arrêtée à la deuxième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en troisième décimale étant arrondis à la deuxième décimale supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






(E + F) × 40






où :






E      représente le taux de droit prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait du tabac fabriqué,






F      le taux de droit prévu à l’alinéa 4c) de l’annexe 3 qui s’est appliqué au moment du retrait du tabac fabriqué.














(3) Subsection (2) comes into force on December 1, 2019.









(3) Le paragraphe (2) entre en vigueur le 1er décembre 2019.












2003, c. 15, s. 47(1); 2007, c. 35, ss. 204(1) and 207(1); 2008, c. 28, ss. 63(1) and (2); 2013, c. 33, ss. 56(1) and (2)



79. (1) The portion of Schedule 1 to the Act before section 5 is replaced by the following:









79. (1) Le passage de l’annexe 1 de la même loi précédant l’article 5 est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 15, par. 47(1); 2007, ch. 35, par. 204(1) et 207(1); 2008, ch. 28, par. 63(1) et (2); 2013, ch. 33, par. 56(1) et (2)












SCHEDULE 1 









ANNEXE 1 














(Sections 42, 43.1 and 58.2)









(articles 42, 43.1 et 58.2)












RATES OF DUTY ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS









TAUX DU DROIT SUR LES PRODUITS DU TABAC














1. Cigarettes: for each five cigarettes or fraction of five cigarettes contained in any package,






(a) $0.52575; or






(b) if the rate referred to in paragraph (a) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the adjusted rate.









1. Cigarettes, par quantité de cinq cigarettes, ou fraction de cette quantité, contenue dans un paquet :






a) 0,525 75 $;






b) si le taux prévu à l’alinéa a) a été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), le taux ajusté.














2. Tobacco sticks: per stick,






(a) $0.10515; or






(b) if the rate referred to in paragraph (a) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the adjusted rate.









2. Bâtonnets de tabac, par bâtonnet :






a) 0,105 15 $;






b) si le taux prévu à l’alinéa a) a été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), le taux ajusté.














3. Manufactured tobacco other than ciga-rettes and tobacco sticks: per 50 grams or fraction of 50 grams contained in any package,






(a) $6.57188; or






(b) if the rate referred to in paragraph (a) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the adjusted rate.









3. Tabac fabriqué, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, par quantité de 50 grammes, ou fraction de cette quantité, contenue dans un emballage :






a) 6,571 88 $;






b) si le taux prévu à l’alinéa a) a été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), le taux ajusté.














4. Cigars: per 1,000 cigars,






(a) $22.88559; or






(b) if the rate referred to in paragraph (a) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the adjusted rate.









4. Cigares, par lot de 1 000 cigares :






a) 22,885 59 $;






b) si le taux prévu à l’alinéa a) a été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), le taux ajusté.














(2) Schedule 1 to the Act is amended by replacing the references after the heading “SCHEDULE 1” with the following:









(2) Les renvois qui suivent le titre « ANNEXE 1 », à l’annexe 1 de la même loi, sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














 









 














(Sections 42, 43.1 and 58.2, subsections 216(2) and (3) and section 240)









(articles 42, 43.1 et 58.2, paragraphes 216(2) et (3) et article 240)














(3) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














(4) Subsection (2) comes into force on December 1, 2019.









(4) Le paragraphe (2) entre en vigueur le 1er décembre 2019.












2007, c. 35, ss. 208(1) and (2)



80. (1) Schedule 2 to the Act is replaced by the following:









80. (1) L’annexe 2 de la même loi est remplacée par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 35, par. 208(1) et (2)












SCHEDULE 2 









ANNEXE 2 














(Sections 43 and 43.1)









(articles 43 et 43.1)












ADDITIONAL DUTY ON CIGARS









DROIT ADDITIONNEL SUR LES CIGARES














Cigars: per cigar, the greater of






(a) either






(i) $0.08226, or






(ii) if the rate referred to in subparagraph (i) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the adjusted rate; and






(b) the amount obtained by multiplying the sale price, in the case of cigars manufactured in Canada, or the duty-paid value, in the case of imported cigars, by the following percent-age:






(i) if the rate referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) has not been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), 82%, or






(ii) if the rate referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) has been adjusted under subsection 43.1(2), the amount, rounded to the nearest whole number, or, if the amount is equidistant from two consecutive whole numbers, to the higher whole number, expressed as a percentage, determined by the formula






  A × 1000






where






A      is the adjusted rate referred to in subparagraph (a)(ii), as if that rate were not expressed in dollars.









Cigares, par cigare, la plus élevée des sommes suivantes :






a) selon le cas :






(i) 0,082 26 $,






(ii) si le taux prévu au sous-alinéa (i) a été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), le taux ajusté;






b) le produit du prix de vente, dans le cas de cigares fabriqués au Canada, ou de la valeur à l’acquitté, dans le cas de cigares importés, par celui des pourcentages ci-après qui est applicable :






(i) si le taux prévu au sous-alinéa a)(i) n’a pas été ajusté conformément au paragraphe 43.1(2), 82 %,






(ii) si oui, la somme, exprimée en pourcentage, — arrêtée à l’unité, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en première décimale étant arrondis à l’unité supérieure — obtenue par la formule suivante :






  A × 1000






où :






A      représente le taux ajusté prévu au sous-alinéa a)(ii), à supposer qu’il n’est pas exprimé en dollars.














(2) Schedule 2 to the Act is amended by replacing the references after the heading “SCHEDULE 2” with the following:









(2) Les renvois qui suivent le titre « ANNEXE 2 », à l’annexe 2 de la même loi, sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














 









 














(Sections 43 and 43.1 and subsections 216(2) and (3))









(articles 43 et 43.1 et paragraphes 216(2) et (3))














(3) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














(4) Subsection (2) comes into force on December 1, 2019.









(4) Le paragraphe (2) entre en vigueur le 1er décembre 2019.












2003, c. 15, ss. 51 to 53; 2008, c. 28, ss. 65(1), 66(1) and 67(1); 2013, c. 33, ss. 57(1), 58(1) and 59(1)



81. (1) The portion of Schedule 3 to the Act before section 4 is replaced by the following:









81. (1) Le passage de l’annexe 3 de la même loi précédant l’article 4 est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 15, art. 51 à 53; 2008, ch. 28, par. 65(1), 66(1) et 67(1); 2013, ch. 33, par. 57(1), 58(1) et 59(1)












SCHEDULE 3 









ANNEXE 3 














(Sections 53, 54, 56 and 58.2)









(articles 53, 54, 56 et 58.2)












RATES OF SPECIAL DUTIES ON CERTAIN MANUFACTURED TOBACCO









TAUX DES DROITS SPÉCIAUX SUR CERTAINS PRODUITS DE TABAC FABRIQUÉ














1. Special duty on imported manufactured tobacco:






(a) in dollars per cigarette, the rate determined by the formula, rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth, or, if the rate is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth,






  A/5






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes;






(b) in dollars per tobacco stick, the rate of duty applicable under section 2 of Schedule 1 per tobacco stick; and






(c) in dollars per 50 grams, or fraction of 50 grams, contained in any package of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks, the rate of duty applicable under section 3 of Schedule 1 per 50 grams.









1. Droit spécial sur le tabac fabriqué importé :






a) en dollars par cigarette, le taux — arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure — obtenu par la formule suivante :






 A/5






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1;






b) en dollars par bâtonnet de tabac, le taux de droit applicable à chaque bâtonnet de tabac, prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1;






c) en dollars par quantité de 50 grammes, ou fraction de cette quantité, de tabac fabriqué contenue dans un emballage, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de 50 grammes, prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1.














2. Special duty on traveller’s tobacco:






(a) in dollars per cigarette, the rate determined by the formula, rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth, or, if the rate is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth,






  A/5






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes;






(b) in dollars per tobacco stick, the rate of duty applicable under section 2 of Schedule 1 per tobacco stick; and






(c) in dollars per 50 grams, or fraction of 50 grams, contained in any package of manufactured tobacco other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks, the rate of duty applicable under section 3 of Schedule 1 per 50 grams.









2. Droit spécial sur le tabac du voyageur :






a) en dollars par cigarette, le taux — arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure — obtenu par la formule suivante :






  A/5






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1;






b) en dollars par bâtonnet de tabac, le taux de droit applicable à chaque bâtonnet de tabac, prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1;






c) en dollars par quantité de 50 grammes, ou fraction de cette quantité, de tabac fabriqué contenue dans un emballage, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de 50 grammes, prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1.














3. Special duty on unstamped tobacco prod-ucts:






(a) in dollars per cigarette, the rate determined by the formula, rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth, or, if the rate is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth,






  A/5






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 1 of Schedule 1 for each five cigarettes;






(b) in dollars per tobacco stick, the rate of duty applicable under section 2 of Schedule 1 per tobacco stick; and






(c) in dollars per kilogram of tobacco products other than cigarettes or tobacco sticks, the rate determined by the formula, rounded to the nearest one-hundred-thousandth, or, if the rate is equidistant from two consecutive one-hundred-thousandths, to the higher one-hundred-thousandth,






A × 20






where






A      is the rate of duty applicable under section 3 of Schedule 1 per 50 grams of manufactured tobacco.









3. Droit spécial sur les produits du tabac non estampillés :






a) en dollars par cigarette, le taux — arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure — obtenu par la formule suivante :






 A/5






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de cinq cigarettes, prévu à l’article 1 de l’annexe 1;






b) en dollars par bâtonnet de tabac, le taux de droit applicable à chaque bâtonnet de tabac, prévu à l’article 2 de l’annexe 1;






c) en dollars par kilogramme de produits du tabac, à l’exclusion des cigarettes et des bâtonnets de tabac, le taux — arrêté à la cinquième décimale, les résultats ayant au moins cinq en sixième décimale étant arrondis à la cinquième décimale supérieure — obtenu par la formule suivante :






A × 20






où :






A      représente le taux de droit applicable à chaque quantité de 50 grammes de tabac fabriqué, prévu à l’article 3 de l’annexe 1.














(2) Schedule 3 to the Act is amended by replacing the references after the heading “SCHEDULE 3” with the following:









(2) Les renvois qui suivent le titre « ANNEXE 3 », à l’annexe 3 de la même loi, sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














 









 














(Sections 53, 54, 56, 58.2 and 240)









(articles 53, 54, 56, 58.2 et 240)














(3) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on February 12, 2014.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 février 2014.














(4) Subsection (2) comes into force on December 1, 2019.









(4) Le paragraphe (2) entre en vigueur le 1er décembre 2019.












Application









Application














82. For the purposes of applying the provisions of the Customs Act that provide for the payment of, or the liability to pay, interest in respect of any amount, the amount is to be determined and interest is to be computed on it as though paragraphs 1(a), 2(a), 3(a) and 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Excise Act, 2001, as enacted by section 79, subparagraphs (a)(i) and (b)(i) of Schedule 2 of that Act, as enacted by section 80, and section 81 had come into force on February 12, 2014.









82. Pour l’application des dispositions de la Loi sur les douanes concernant le paiement d’intérêts, ou l’obligation d’en payer, relativement à une somme donnée, cette somme est déterminée et les intérêts afférents sont calculés comme si les alinéas 1a), 2a), 3a) et 4a) de l’annexe 1 de la Loi de 2001 sur l’accise, édictés par l’article 79, les sous-alinéas a)(i) et b)(i) de l’annexe 2 de cette loi, édictés par l’article 80, et l’article 81 étaient entrés en vigueur le 12 février 2014.










R.S., c. E-15



Excise Tax Act









Loi sur la taxe d’accise



L.R., ch. E-15










R.S., c. 7 (2nd Supp.), s. 34(1)



83. (1) Subsection 68.16(3) of the Excise Tax Act is replaced by the following:









83. (1) Le paragraphe 68.16(3) de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 7 (2e suppl.), par. 34(1)










Presumption



(3) Any payment made to a person referred to in paragraph (1)(i) or (2)(e) shall, for the purposes of subsection (4), paragraph 97.1(1)(b) and sections 98 to 101, be deemed to have been made to the purchaser.









(3) Tout paiement versé à une personne visée aux alinéas (1)i) ou (2)e) est réputé, pour l’application du paragraphe (4), de l’alinéa 97.1(1)b) et des articles 98 à 101, avoir été versé à l’acheteur.



Présomption












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le lendemain de la date de sanction de la présente loi.












2006, c. 4, s. 130(1)



84. (1) Subsection 79.03(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









84. (1) Le paragraphe 79.03(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 4, par. 130(1)










Interest and penalty amounts of $25 or less



(4) If, at any time, a person pays an amount not less than the total of all amounts, other than interest and penalty under subsection 7(1.1) or 68.5(9.1) or section 95.1 or 95.2, owing at that time to Her Majesty in right of Canada under this Act for a reporting period of the person and the total amount of interest and penalty payable by the person under this Act for that reporting period is not more than $25.00, the Minister may cancel the interest and penalty.









(4) Si, à un moment donné, une personne paie une somme égale ou supérieure au total des sommes, sauf les intérêts et les pénalités prévues aux paragraphes 7(1.1) ou 68.5(9.1) ou aux articles 95.1 ou 95.2, dont elle est alors débitrice envers Sa Majesté du chef du Canada en vertu de la présente loi pour sa période de déclaration et que le total des intérêts et pénalités à payer par elle en vertu de la présente loi pour cette période n’excède pas 25 $, le ministre peut annuler les intérêts et pénalités.



Intérêts et pénalités de 25 $ ou moins












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le lendemain de la date de sanction de la présente loi.














85. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 95.1:









85. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 95.1, de ce qui suit :












False statements or omissions



95.2 (1) Every person who knowingly, or under circumstances amounting to gross negligence, makes or participates in, assents to or acquiesces in the making of, a false statement or omission in a return, application, form, certificate, statement, invoice, answer or report (each of which is in this section referred to as a “return”) made in respect of a reporting period is liable to a penalty of the greater of $250 and 25% of the total of








(a) if the false statement or omission is relevant to the determination of an amount of tax payable by the person, the amount, if any, by which








(i) that tax payable








exceeds








(ii) the amount that would be the tax payable by the person if the tax were determined on the basis of the information provided in the return, and








(b) if the false statement or omission is relevant to the determination of a refund, rebate or any other amount payable to the person (each of which is in this section referred to as a “rebate”) under this Act, the amount, if any, by which








(i) the amount that would be the rebate payable to the person if the rebate were determined on the basis of the information provided in the return








exceeds








(ii) the amount of the rebate payable to the person.









95.2 (1) Toute personne qui, sciemment ou dans des circonstances équivalant à faute lourde, fait un faux énoncé ou une omission dans une déclaration, une demande, un formulaire, un certificat, un état, une facture, une réponse ou un rapport (appelés « déclaration » au présent article) établi pour une période de déclaration, ou y participe, y consent ou y acquiesce, est passible d’une pénalité de 250 $ ou, s’il est plus élevé, d’un montant égal à 25 % de la somme des montants suivants :



Faux énoncés ou omissions




a) si le faux énoncé ou l’omission a trait au calcul d’un montant de taxe à payer par la personne, l’excédent du montant visé au sous-alinéa (i) sur celui visé au sous-alinéa (ii) :








(i) le montant de cette taxe,








(ii) le montant qui correspondrait à la taxe à payer par la personne si la taxe était déterminée d’après les renseignements indiqués dans la déclaration;








b) si le faux énoncé ou l’omission a trait au calcul d’un remboursement, d’une remise ou d’un autre montant à payer à la personne (appelés « remise » au présent article) en vertu de la présente loi, l’excédent du montant visé au sous-alinéa (i) sur celui visé au sous-alinéa (ii) :








(i) le montant qui correspondrait à la remise à payer à la personne si la taxe était déterminée d’après les renseignements indiqués dans la déclaration,








(ii) le montant de la remise à payer à la personne.














Burden of proof in respect of penalties



(2) If, in an appeal under this Act, a penalty assessed by the Minister under this section is in issue, the burden of establishing the facts justifying the assessment of the penalty is on the Minister.









(2) Dans tout appel interjeté en vertu de la présente loi au sujet d’une pénalité imposée par le ministre en vertu du présent article, le ministre a la charge d’établir les faits qui justifient l’imposition de la pénalité.



Charge de la preuve relativement aux pénalités












(2) Subsection (1) applies to any return filed by a person after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux déclarations produites par une personne après la date de sanction de la présente loi.












R.S., c. 7 (2nd Supp.), s. 44(1); R.S., c. 12 (4th Supp.), s. 36(1)



86. (1) Section 97 of the Act is replaced by the following:









86. (1) L’article 97 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 7 (2e suppl.), par. 44(1); L.R., ch. 12 (4e suppl.), par. 36(1)










Failing to file return



97. Every person required, by or pursuant to any Part except Part I, to file a return, who fails to file the return within the time it is required to be filed, is guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100.









97. Quiconque est requis, aux termes d’une partie de la présente loi, sauf la partie I, de produire un rapport ou une déclaration et omet de le faire dans le délai imparti commet une infraction et encourt une amende minimale de dix dollars et maximale de cent dollars.



Défaut de produire un rapport ou une déclaration










Offences for false statements



97.1 (1) Every person commits an offence who








(a) makes, or participates in, assents to or acquiesces in the making of, a false or deceptive statement in a return, application, form, certificate, statement, invoice, answer or report filed or made as required by or under this Act or the regulations made under this Act;








(b) for the purpose of evading payment or remittance of any tax under this Act, or obtaining a refund, rebate or other amount to which the person is not entitled under this Act,








(i) destroys, alters, mutilates, conceals or otherwise disposes of any records of a person, or








(ii) makes, or assents to or acquiesces in the making of, a false or deceptive entry, or omits, or assents to or acquiesces in the omission, to enter a material particular in the records of a person;








(c) wilfully, in any manner, evades or attempts to evade compliance with this Act or payment or remittance of tax or any other amount imposed under this Act;








(d) wilfully, in any manner, obtains or attempts to obtain a refund, rebate or other amount to which the person is not entitled under this Act; or








(e) conspires with any person to commit an offence described in any of paragraphs (a) to (d).









97.1 (1) Commet une infraction toute personne qui :



Déclarations fausses




a) fait des déclarations fausses ou trompeuses, ou participe, consent ou acquiesce à leur énonciation, dans une déclaration, une demande, un formulaire, un certificat, un état, une facture, une réponse ou un rapport produit ou fait en vertu de la présente loi ou des règlements pris sous son régime;








b) pour éluder le paiement ou le versement d’une taxe prévue par la présente loi ou pour obtenir un remboursement, une remise ou un autre montant sans y avoir droit aux termes de la présente loi :








(i) détruit, modifie, mutile, cache ou autrement aliène tout registre d’une personne,








(ii) fait des inscriptions fausses ou trompeuses, ou consent ou acquiesce à leur accomplissement, ou omet, ou consent ou acquiesce à l’omission, d’inscrire un détail important dans les registres d’une personne;








c) volontairement, de quelque manière que ce soit, élude ou tente d’éluder l’observation de la présente loi ou le paiement ou le versement d’une taxe ou d’un autre montant qu’elle impose;








d) volontairement, de quelque manière que ce soit, obtient ou tente d’obtenir un remboursement, une remise ou un autre montant sans y avoir droit aux termes de la présente loi;








e) conspire avec une personne pour commettre une infraction visée à l’un des alinéas a) à d).














Prosecution on summary conviction



(2) Every person who commits an offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and, in addition to any penalty otherwise provided, is liable to








(a) a fine of not less than 50%, and not more than 200%, of the amount of the tax that was sought to be evaded, or of the refund, rebate or other amount sought, or, if the amount that was sought to be evaded cannot be ascertained, a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $25,000; or








(b) both a fine referred to in paragraph (a) and imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.









(2) Toute personne qui commet une infraction visée au paragraphe (1) encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire et outre toute pénalité prévue par ailleurs :



Déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire




a) soit une amende minimale de 50 % et maximale de 200 % de la taxe qu’elle a tenté d’éluder ou du remboursement, de la remise ou de l’autre montant qu’elle a cherché à obtenir ou, si le montant n’est pas vérifiable, une amende minimale de 1 000 $ et maximale de 25 000 $;








b) soit une telle amende et un emprisonnement maximal de deux ans.














Prosecution on indictment



(3) Every person who is charged with an offence described in subsection (1) may, at the election of the Attorney General of Canada, be prosecuted on indictment and, if convicted, is, in addition to any penalty otherwise provided, liable to








(a) a fine of not less than 100%, and not more than 200%, of the amount of the tax that was sought to be evaded, or of the refund, rebate or other amount sought, or, if the amount that was sought to be evaded cannot be ascertained, a fine of not less than $2,000 and not more than $25,000; or








(b) both a fine referred to in paragraph (a) and imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.









(3) Toute personne accusée d’une infraction visée au paragraphe (1) peut, au choix du procureur général du Canada, être poursuivie par voie de mise en accusation et, si elle est déclarée coupable, encourt, outre toute pénalité prévue par ailleurs :



Poursuite par voie de mise en accusation




a) soit une amende minimale de 100 % et maximale de 200 % de la taxe qu’elle a tenté d’éluder ou du remboursement, de la remise ou de l’autre montant qu’elle a cherché à obtenir ou, si le montant n’est pas vérifiable, une amende minimale de 2 000 $ et maximale de 25 000 $;








b) soit une telle amende et un emprisonnement maximal de cinq ans.














Penalty on conviction



(4) A person that is convicted of an offence under subsection (2) or (3) is not liable to pay a penalty imposed under subsection 79(5) or section 95.1, 95.2 or 109 or under a regulation made under this Act for the same evasion or attempt unless a notice of assessment for that penalty was issued before the information or complaint giving rise to the conviction was laid or made.









(4) La personne déclarée coupable d’une infraction visée aux paragraphes (2) ou (3) n’est passible de la pénalité prévue au paragraphe 79(5) ou aux articles 95.1, 95.2 ou 109 ou dans un règlement pris sous le régime de la présente loi pour la même évasion ou la même tentative d’évasion que si un avis de cotisation pour cette pénalité a été envoyé avant que la dénonciation ou la plainte qui a donné lieu à la déclaration de culpabilité ait été déposée ou faite.



Pénalité sur déclaration de culpabilité










Stay of appeal



(5) If, in any appeal under this Act, substantially the same facts are at issue as those that are at issue in a prosecution under this section, the Minister may file a stay of proceedings with the Federal Court or may file a request for a postponement or adjournment with the Tribunal, as the case may be, and, on doing so, the proceedings before the Federal Court are stayed or the proceedings before the Tribunal are postponed or adjourned, as the case may be, pending final determination of the outcome of the prosecution.









(5) Le ministre peut demander, à l’égard d’un appel interjeté en vertu de la présente loi, la suspension des procédures devant la Cour fédérale ou la suspension ou l’ajournement des procédures devant le Tribunal lorsque les faits débattus sont pour la plupart les mêmes que ceux qui font l’objet de poursuites entamées en vertu du présent article. Dès lors, les procédures sont suspendues ou ajournées dans l’attente du résultat des poursuites.



Suspension d’appel












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le lendemain de la date de sanction de la présente loi.














87. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 98.1:









87. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 98.1, de ce qui suit :












Electronic funds transfer



98.2 For greater certainty, information obtained by the Minister under Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act may be used for the purposes of this Act.









98.2 Il est entendu que les renseignements obtenus par le ministre sous le régime de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu peuvent être utilisés pour l’application de la présente loi.



Télévirement












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














88. (1) Section 102 of the Act is repealed.









88. (1) L’article 102 de la même loi est abrogé.














(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le lendemain de la date de sanction de la présente loi.














89. (1) Section 108 of the Act is repealed.









89. (1) L’article 108 de la même loi est abrogé.














(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le lendemain de la date de sanction de la présente loi.










2002, c. 9, s. 5



Air Travellers Security Charge Act









Loi sur le droit pour la sécurité des passagers du transport aérien



2002, ch. 9, art. 5












90. (1) The Air Travellers Security Charge Act is amended by adding the following after section 37:









90. (1) La Loi sur le droit pour la sécurité des passagers du transport aérien est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 37, de ce qui suit :












Electronic funds transfer



37.1 For greater certainty, information obtained by the Minister under Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act may be used for the purposes of this Act.









37.1 Il est entendu que les renseignements obtenus par le ministre sous le régime de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu peuvent être utilisés pour l’application de la présente loi.



Télévirement












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.














PART 4









PARTIE 4










1997, c. 36



CUSTOMS TARIFF









TARIF DES DOUANES



1997, ch. 36










Amendments to the Act









Modification de la loi














91. The expression “Supplementary Note.” in Chapter 16 of the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Customs Tariff is replaced by the following:









91. Dans le chapitre 16 de la liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe du Tarif des douanes, «  Note supplémentaire.  » est remplacé par ce qui suit :














      Supplementary Notes.









      Notes supplémentaires.














92. Chapter 16 of the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Act is amended by adding the following after Supplementary Note 1:









92. Le chapitre 16 de la liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après la note supplémentaire 1, de ce qui suit :














2.       Where the components of food preparations of a type used commercially in the preparation of fresh food products for direct sale to a consumer include cheese, those components are to be classified separately, in their respective headings, regardless of their packaging.









2.       Dans le cas où le fromage fait partie des composantes de préparations alimentaires d’un type utilisé dans la préparation de produits alimentaires frais pour la vente directe à un consommateur, ces composantes sont classées séparément, dans leurs positions respectives, peu importe leurs emballages.














93. Tariff item Nos. 8905.20.10 and 8905.90.10 in the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Act are repealed.









93. Les nos tarifaires 8905.20.10 et 8905.90.10 de la liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe de la même loi sont abrogés.














94. Tariff item No. 9809.00.00 in the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Act is repealed.









94. Le no tarifaire 9809.00.00 de la liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe de la même loi est abrogé.














95. The Description of Goods of tariff item No. 9833.00.00 in the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Act is amended by adding a reference to “the Governor General,” before the reference to “the Prime Minister of Canada”.









95. La dénomination des marchandises du no tarifaire 9833.00.00 de la liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction de « au gouverneur général, » avant « au premier ministre du Canada ».














96. The List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the Act is amended by adding, in numerical order, the tariff provisions set out in Schedule 1 to this Act.









96. La liste des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre numérique, des dispositions tarifaires figurant à l’annexe 1 de la présente loi.














97. The List of Intermediate and Final Rates for Tariff Items of the “F” Staging Category set out in the schedule to the Act is amended by adding, in numerical order, the tariff items set out in Schedule 2 to this Act.









97. La liste des taux intermédiaires et des taux finals pour les numéros tarifaires de la catégorie d’échelonnement « F » figurant à l’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre numérique, des numéros tarifaires figurant à l’annexe 2 de la présente loi.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












November 29, 2013



98. (1) Sections 91 and 92 are deemed to have come into force on November 29, 2013.









98. (1) Les articles 91 et 92 sont réputés être entrés en vigueur le 29 novembre 2013.



29 novembre 2013










May 5, 2014



(2) Sections 93, 96 and 97 are deemed to have come into force on May 5, 2014.









(2) Les articles 93, 96 et 97 sont réputés être entrés en vigueur le 5 mai 2014.



5 mai 2014












PART 5









PARTIE 5












CANADA–UNITED STATES ENHANCED TAX INFORMATION EXCHANGE AGREEMENT IMPLEMENTATION ACT









LOI DE MISE EN OEUVRE DE L’ACCORD CANADA–ÉTATS-UNIS POUR UN MEILLEUR ÉCHANGE DE RENSEIGNEMENTS FISCAUX












Enactment of Act









Édiction de la loi












Enactment



99. The Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act, whose text is as follows and whose schedule is set out in Schedule 3 to this Act, is enacted:









99. Est édictée la Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux, dont le texte suit et dont l’annexe figure à l’annexe 3 de la présente loi :



Édiction












An Act to implement the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement









Loi mettant en oeuvre l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act.









1. Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux.



Titre abrégé










Definition of “Agreement”



2. In this Act, “Agreement” means the Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of the United States of America set out in the schedule, as amended from time to time.









2. Pour l’application de la présente loi, « Accord » s’entend de l’accord entre le gouvernement du Canada et le gouvernement des États-Unis d’Amérique, dont le texte figure à l’annexe, avec ses modifications successives.



Définition de « Accord »










Agreement approved



3. The Agreement is approved and has the force of law in Canada during the period that the Agreement, by its terms, is in force.









3. L’Accord est approuvé et a force de loi au Canada pendant la durée de validité prévue par son dispositif.



Approbation










Inconsistent laws — general rule



4. (1) Subject to subsection (2), in the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this Act or the Agreement and the provisions of any other law (other than Part XVIII of the Income Tax Act), the provisions of this Act and the Agreement prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.









4. (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), les dispositions de la présente loi et de l’Accord l’emportent sur les dispositions incompatibles de toute autre loi, à l’exception de la partie XVIII de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.



Incompatibilité— principe










Inconsistent laws — exception



(2) In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of the Agreement and the provisions of the Income Tax Conventions Interpretation Act, the provisions of that Act prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.









(2) Les dispositions de la Loi sur l’interprétation des conventions en matière d’impôts sur le revenu l’emportent sur les dispositions incompatibles de l’Accord.



Incompatibilité— exception










Regulations



5. The Minister of National Revenue may make any regulations that are necessary for carrying out the Agreement or for giving effect to any of its provisions.









5. Le ministre du Revenu national peut prendre les règlements nécessaires à l’exécution de tout ou partie de l’Accord.



Règlements










Entry into force of Agreement



6. (1) The Minister of Finance must cause a notice of the day on which the Agreement enters into force to be published in the Canada Gazette within 60 days after that day.









6. (1) Le ministre des Finances fait publier dans la Gazette du Canada un avis de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’Accord dans les soixante jours suivant cette date.



Entrée en vigueur de l’Accord










Amending instrument



(2) The Minister of Finance must cause a notice of the day on which any instrument amending the Agreement enters into force to be published, together with a copy of the instrument, in the Canada Gazette within 60 days after that day.









(2) Le ministre des Finances fait publier dans la Gazette du Canada un avis de la date d’entrée en vigueur de tout texte modifiant l’Accord, ainsi qu’une copie du texte, dans les soixante jours suivant cette date.



Texte modificatif










Termination



(3) The Minister of Finance must cause a notice of the day on which the Agreement is terminated to be published in the Canada Gazette within 60 days after that day.









(3) Le ministre des Finances fait publier dans la Gazette du Canada un avis de la date de cessation d’effet de l’Accord dans les soixante jours suivant cette date.



Dénonciation








R.S., c. 1 (5th Supp.)



Amendments to the Income Tax Act









Modification de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu



L.R., ch. 1 (5e suppl.)












100. (1) The portion of subsection 162(6) of the Income Tax Act before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:









100. (1) Le paragraphe 162(6) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Failure to provide identification number



(6) Every person or partnership who fails to provide on request their Social Insurance Number, their business number or their U.S. federal taxpayer identifying number to a person required under this Act or a regulation to make an information return requiring the number is liable to a penalty of $100 for each such failure, unless








(a) an application for the assignment of the number is made within 15 days (or, in the case of a U.S. federal taxpayer identifying number, 90 days) after the request was received; and









(6) La personne ou la société de personnes qui ne fournit pas sur demande son numéro d’assurance sociale, son numéro d’entreprise ou son numéro d’identification fiscal fédéral américain à une personne tenue par la présente loi ou par une disposition réglementaire de remplir une déclaration de renseignements devant comporter ce numéro est passible d’une pénalité de 100 $ pour chaque défaut, sauf si :



Défaut de fournir son numéro d’identification




a) une demande d’attribution du numéro est faite dans les 15 jours suivant la réception de la demande ou, dans le cas d’un numéro d’identification fiscal fédéral américain, dans les 90 jours suivant la réception de cette demande;








b) le numéro est fourni à cette personne dans les 15 jours suivant sa réception.
















(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day on which the agreement set out in the schedule to the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act enters into force.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’accord figurant à l’annexe de la Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux.














101. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after Part XVII:









101. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après la partie XVII, de ce qui suit :














PART XVIII









PARTIE XVIII












ENHANCED INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORTING









PROCESSUS ÉLARGI DE DÉCLARATION DE RENSEIGNEMENTS












Definitions



263. (1) The following definitions apply in this Part.




“agreement”« accord »



“agreement” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act.




“electronic filing”« transmission électronique »



“electronic filing” means using electronic media in a manner specified by the Minister.




“listed financial institution”« institution financière particulière »



“listed financial institution” means a financial institution that is








(a) an authorized foreign bank within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act in respect of its business in Canada, or a bank to which that Act applies;








(b) a cooperative credit society, a savings and credit union or a caisse populaire regulated by a provincial Act;








(c) an association regulated by the Cooperative Credit Associations Act;








(d) a central cooperative credit society, as defined in section 2 of the Cooperative Credit Associations Act, or a credit union central or a federation of credit unions or caisses populaires that is regulated by a provincial Act other than one enacted by the legislature of Quebec;








(e) a financial services cooperative regulated by An Act respecting financial services cooperatives, R.S.Q., c. C-67.3, or An Act respecting the Mouvement Desjardins, S.Q. 2000, c. 77;








(f) a life company or a foreign life company to which the Insurance Companies Act applies or a life insurance company regulated by a provincial Act;








(g) a company to which the Trust and Loan Companies Act applies;








(h) a trust company regulated by a provincial Act;








(i) a loan company regulated by a provincial Act;








(j) an entity authorized under provincial legislation to engage in the business of dealing in securities or any other financial instruments, or to provide portfolio management, investment advising, fund administration, or fund management, services;








(k) an entity that is represented or promoted to the public as a collective investment vehicle, mutual fund, exchange traded fund, private equity fund, hedge fund, venture capital fund, leveraged buyout fund or similar investment vehicle that is established to invest or trade in financial assets and that is managed by an entity referred to in paragraph (j);








(l) an entity that is a clearing house or clearing agency; or








(m) a department or an agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada or of a province that is engaged in the business of accepting deposit liabilities.




“non-reporting Canadian financial institution”« institution financière canadienne non déclarante »



“non-reporting Canadian financial institution” means any Canadian financial institution or other entity resident in Canada that








(a) is described in any of paragraphs C, D and G to J of section III of Annex II to the agreement;








(b) makes a reasonable determination that it is described in any of paragraphs A, B, E and F of section III of Annex II to the agreement;








(c) qualifies as an exempt beneficial owner under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations in effect on the date of signature of the agreement; or








(d) makes a reasonable determination that it qualifies as a deemed-compliant FFI under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations in effect on the date of signature of the agreement.




“U.S. reportable account”« compte déclarable américain »



“U.S. reportable account” means a financial account that, under the agreement, is to be treated as a U.S. reportable account.









263. (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente partie.



Définitions




« accord » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux.



« accord »“agreement”




« compte déclarable américain » Compte financier qui, selon l’accord, doit être considéré comme un compte déclarable américain.



« compte déclarable américain »“U.S. reportable account”




« institution financière canadienne non déclarante » Toute institution financière canadienne ou autre entité résidant au Canada qui, selon le cas :



« institution financière canadienne non déclarante »“non-reporting Canadian financial institution”




a) est visée à l’une des sous-sections C, D et G à J de la section III de l’annexe II de l’accord;








b) démontre de façon adéquate qu’elle est visée à l’une des sous-sections A, B, E et F de la section III de l’annexe II de l’accord;








c) remplit les conditions nécessaires pour être un bénéficiaire effectif exempté selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis en vigueur à la date de la signature de l’accord;








d) démontre de façon adéquate qu’elle remplit les conditions nécessaires pour être une IFE réputée conforme, au sens donné au terme deemed-compliant FFI dans les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis en vigueur à la date de la signature de l’accord.








« institution financière particulière » Institution financière qui est, selon le cas :



« institution financière particulière »“listed financial institution”




a) une banque régie par la Loi sur les banques ou une banque étrangère autorisée, au sens de l’article 2 de cette loi, dans le cadre des activités que cette dernière exerce au Canada;








b) une coopérative de crédit, une caisse d’épargne et de crédit ou une caisse populaire régie par une loi provinciale;








c) une association régie par la Loi sur les associations coopératives de crédit;








d) une coopérative de crédit centrale, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les associations coopératives de crédit, ou une centrale de caisses de crédit ou une fédération de caisses de crédit ou de caisses populaires régie par une loi provinciale autre qu’une loi édictée par la législature du Québec;








e) une coopérative de services financiers régie par la Loi sur les coopératives de services financiers, L.R.Q., ch. C-67.3, ou la Loi sur le Mouvement Desjardins, L.Q. 2000, ch. 77;








f) une société d’assurance-vie ou une société d’assurance-vie étrangère régie par la Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances ou une société d’assurance-vie régie par une loi provinciale;








g) une société régie par la Loi sur les sociétés de fiducie et de prêt;








h) une société de fiducie régie par une loi provinciale;








i) une société de prêt régie par une loi provinciale;








j) une entité autorisée en vertu de la législation provinciale à se livrer au commerce des valeurs mobilières ou d’autres instruments financiers ou à fournir des services de gestion de portefeuille, de conseils en placement, d’administration de fonds ou de gestion de fonds;








k) une entité qui est présentée au public comme étant un mécanisme de placement collectif, un fonds commun de placement, un fonds négocié en bourse, un fonds de capital-investissement, un fonds spéculatif, un fonds de capital-risque, un fonds de rachat d’entreprise par effet de levier ou un mécanisme de placement similaire qui est établi pour faire des investissements dans des actifs financiers, ou le commerce de tels actifs, et qui est géré par une entité visée à l’alinéa j);








l) une entité qui est une chambre ou une agence de compensation;








m) un ministère ou un mandataire de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou d’une province qui se livre à l’acceptation de dépôts.








« transmission électronique » La transmission de documents par voie électronique selon les modalités établies par le ministre.



« transmission électronique »“electronic filing”










Financial institution



(2) For the purposes of this Part, “Canadian financial institution” and “reporting Canadian financial institution” each have the meaning that would be assigned by the agreement, and the definition “non-reporting Canadian financial institution” in subsection (1) has the meaning that would be assigned by that subsection, if the definition “Financial Institution” in subparagraph 1(g) of Article 1 of the agreement were read as follows:








g) The term “Financial Institution” means any Entity that is a Custodial Institution, a Depository Institution, an Investment Entity or a Specified Insurance Company, and that is a listed financial institution within the meaning of Part XVIII of the Income Tax Act.









(2) Pour l’application de la présente partie, les termes « institution financière canadienne » et « institution financière canadienne déclarante » ont le sens qui leur serait donné dans l’accord et le terme « institution financière canadienne non déclarante », au paragraphe (1), a le sens qui lui serait donné par ce paragraphe si la définition de « institution financière », à l’alinéa 1g) de l’article 1 de l’accord, avait le libellé suivant :



Institution financière




g) Le terme « institution financière » désigne une entité — établissement de garde de valeurs, établissement de dépôt, entité d’investissement ou compagnie d’assurance particulière — qui est une institution financière particulière au sens de la partie XVIII de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.














Financial account



(3) For the purposes of this Part, the agreement is to be read as if the definition “Financial Account” in subparagraph 1(s) of Article 1 of the agreement included the following subparagraph after subparagraph (1):








(1.1) an account that is a client name account maintained by a person or entity that is authorized under provincial legislation to engage in the business of dealing in securities or any other financial instruments, or to provide portfolio management or investment advising services.









(3) Pour l’application de la présente partie, l’accord s’applique comme si le sous-alinéa ci-après figurait après le sous-alinéa (1) de la définition de « compte financier », à l’alinéa 1s) de l’article 1 de l’accord :



Compte financier




(1.1) un compte qui est un compte de nom de client tenu par une personne ou une entité qui est autorisée en vertu de la législation provinciale à se livrer au commerce des valeurs mobilières ou d’autres instruments financiers ou à fournir des services de gestion de portefeuille ou de conseils en placement;














Identification number



(4) For the purposes of this Part, a reference in the agreement to “Canadian TIN” or “taxpayer identification number” is to be read as including a reference to Social Insurance Number.









(4) Pour l’application de la présente partie, les mentions « NIF canadien » et « numéro d’identification fiscal » figurant dans l’accord valent également mention du numéro d’assurance sociale.



Numéro d’identification










Term defined in agreement



(5) In this Part, a term has the meaning that is defined in, or assigned by, the agreement unless the term is defined in this Part.









(5) Pour l’application de la présente partie, les termes qui n’y sont pas définis s’entendent au sens de l’accord.



Terminologie










Amending instrument



(6) No person shall be liable for a failure to comply with a duty or obligation imposed by this Act that results from an amendment to the agreement unless at the date of the alleged failure,








(a) the text of the instrument that effected the amendment had been published in the Canada Gazette; or








(b) reasonable steps had been taken to bring the purport of the amendment to the notice of those persons likely to be affected by it.









(6) Nul n’encourt de responsabilité pour ne pas s’être conformé à une obligation imposée par la présente loi qui découle d’une modification apportée à l’accord, sauf si, à la date du prétendu manquement, selon le cas :



Texte modificatif




a) le texte de la modification avait été publié dans la Gazette du Canada;








b) des mesures raisonnables avaient été prises pour que les intéressés soient informés de la teneur de la modification.














Designation of account



264. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a reporting Canadian financial institution may designate a financial account to not be a U.S. reportable account for a calendar year if the account is








(a) a preexisting individual account described in paragraph A of section II of Annex I to the agreement;








(b) a new individual account described in paragraph A of section III of Annex I to the agreement;








(c) a preexisting entity account described in paragraph A of section IV of Annex I to the agreement; or








(d) a new entity account described in paragraph A of section V of Annex I to the agreement.









264. (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), les comptes financiers ci-après peuvent être désignés par une institution financière canadienne déclarante comme n’étant pas des comptes déclarables américains pour une année civile :



Désignation de comptes




a) les comptes de particuliers préexistants visés à la sous-section A de la section II de l’annexe I de l’accord;








b) les nouveaux comptes de particuliers visés à la sous-section A de la section III de l’annexe I de l’accord;








c) les comptes d’entités préexistants visés à la sous-section A de la section IV de l’annexe I de l’accord;








d) les nouveaux comptes d’entités visés à la sous-section A de la section V de l’annexe I de l’accord.














U.S. reportable account



(2) A reporting Canadian financial institution may not designate a financial account for a calendar year unless the account is part of a clearly identifiable group of accounts all of which are designated for the year.









(2) Une institution financière canadienne déclarante ne peut désigner un compte financier pour une année civile que s’il fait partie d’un groupe de comptes clairement identifiable qui sont tous désignés pour l’année.



Compte déclarable américain










Applicable rules



(3) The rules in paragraph C of section VI of Annex I to the agreement apply in determining whether a financial account is described in any of paragraphs (1)(a) to (d).









(3) Les règles énoncées à la sous-section C de la section VI de l’annexe I de l’accord s’appliquent pour déterminer si un compte financier est visé à l’un des alinéas (1)a) à d).



Règles applicables










Identification obligation — financial accounts



265. (1) Every reporting Canadian financial institution shall establish, maintain and document the due diligence procedures set out in subsections (2) and (3).









265. (1) Toute institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue d’établir, de tenir à jour et de documenter les procédures de diligence raisonnable visées aux paragraphes (2) et (3).



Obligation d’identification— comptes financiers










Due diligence — general



(2) Every reporting Canadian financial institution shall have the following due diligence procedures:








(a) for preexisting individual accounts that are lower value accounts, other than accounts described in paragraph A of section II of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs B and C of that section, subject to paragraph F of that section;








(b) for preexisting individual accounts that are high value accounts, other than accounts described in paragraph A of section II of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs D and E of that section, subject to paragraph F of that section;








(c) for new individual accounts, other than accounts described in paragraph A of section III of Annex I to the agreement,








(i) the procedures described in paragraph B of section III of Annex I to the agreement, or








(ii) in respect of a clearly identifiable group of accounts, the procedures that would be applicable if the accounts were preexisting individual accounts that were lower value accounts, with such modifications as the circumstances require, including procedures to review any documentary evidence obtained by the institution in connection with the opening of the accounts for the U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of section II of Annex I to the agreement;








(d) for preexisting entity accounts, other than accounts described in paragraph A of section IV of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs D and E of that section; and








(e) for new entity accounts, other than accounts described in paragraph A of section V of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs B to E of that section.









(2) Toute institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de se doter des procédures de diligence raisonnable suivantes :



Diligence raisonnable —généralités




a) s’agissant de comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des comptes de faible valeur, à l’exception des comptes visés à la sous-section A de la section II de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections B et C de cette section, sous réserve de la sous-section F de cette section;








b) s’agissant de comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des comptes de valeur élevée, à l’exception des comptes visés à la sous-section A de la section II de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections D et E de cette section, sous réserve de la sous-section F de cette section;








c) s’agissant de nouveaux comptes de particuliers, à l’exception des comptes visés à la sous-section A de la section III de l’annexe I de l’accord :








(i) soit les procédures exposées à la sous-section B de cette section,








(ii) soit, dans le cas d’un groupe de comptes clairement identifiable, les procédures qui seraient applicables s’il s’agissait de comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des comptes de faible valeur, avec les modifications nécessaires, y compris les procédures d’examen des preuves documentaires obtenues par l’institution dans le cadre de l’ouverture des comptes quant à la présence des indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la section II de cette annexe;








d) s’agissant de comptes d’entités préexistants, à l’exception des comptes visés à la sous-section A de la section IV de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections D et E de cette section;








e) s’agissant de nouveaux comptes d’entités, à l’exception des comptes visés à la sous-section A de la section V de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections B à E de cette section.














Due diligence — no designation



(3) If a reporting Canadian financial institution does not designate a financial account under subsection 264(1) for a calendar year, the institution shall have the following due diligence procedures with respect to the account:








(a) if the account is a preexisting individual account described in paragraph A of section II of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs B and C of that section, subject to paragraph F of that section;








(b) if the account is a new individual account described in paragraph A of section III of Annex I to the agreement,








(i) the procedures described in paragraph B of section III of Annex I to the agreement, or








(ii) in respect of an account that is part of a clearly identifiable group of accounts, the procedures that would be applicable if the account were a preexisting individual account that was a lower value account, with such modifications as the circumstances require, including procedures to review any documentary evidence obtained by the institution in connection with the opening of the account for the U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of section II of Annex I to the agreement;








(c) if the account is a preexisting entity account described in paragraph A of section IV of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs D and E of that section; and








(d) if the account is a new entity account described in paragraph A of section V of Annex I to the agreement, the procedures described in paragraphs B to E of that section.









(3) L’institution financière canadienne déclarante qui ne désigne pas un compte financier en application du paragraphe 264(1) pour une année civile est tenue de se doter des procédures de diligence raisonnable ci-après à l’égard du compte :



Diligence raisonnable —comptes non désignés




a) s’agissant d’un compte de particulier préexistant visé à la sous-section A de la section II de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections B et C de cette section, sous réserve de la sous-section F de cette section;








b) s’agissant d’un nouveau compte de particulier visé à la sous-section A de la section III de l’annexe I de l’accord :








(i) soit les procédures exposées à la sous-section B de cette section,








(ii) soit, dans le cas d’un compte qui fait partie d’un groupe de comptes clairement identifiable, les procédures qui seraient applicables s’il s’agissait d’un compte de particulier préexistant qui est un compte de faible valeur, avec les modifications nécessaires, y compris les procédures d’examen des preuves documentaires obtenues par l’institution dans le cadre de l’ouverture du compte quant à la présence des indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la section II de cette annexe;








c) s’agissant d’un compte d’entité préexistant visé à la sous-section A de la section IV de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections D et E de cette section;








d) s’agissant d’un nouveau compte d’entité visé à la sous-section A de la section V de l’annexe I de l’accord, les procédures exposées aux sous-sections B à E de cette section.














Rules and definitions



(4) For the purposes of subsections (2) and (3), subparagraphs B(1) to (3) of section I, and section VI, of Annex I to the agreement apply except that








(a) in applying paragraph C of that section VI, an account balance that has a negative value is deemed to be nil; and








(b) the definition “NFFE” in subparagraphB(2) of that section VI is to be read as follows:








2. NFFE








An “NFFE” means any Non-U.S. Entity that is not an FFI as defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations or is an Entity described in subparagraph B(4)(j) of this section, and also includes any Non-U.S. Entity








a) that is resident in Canada and is not a listed financial institution within the meaning of Part XVIII of the Income Tax Act; or








b) that is resident in a Partner Jurisdiction other than Canada and is not a Financial Institution.









(4) Les paragraphes 1 à 3 de la sous-section B de la section I de l’annexe I de l’accord ainsi que la section VI de cette annexe s’appliquent dans le cadre des paragraphes (2) et (3). Toutefois :



Règles et définitions




a) pour l’application de la sous-section C de cette section VI, le compte dont le solde est négatif est réputé avoir un solde nul;








b) la définition de « EENF » au paragraphe 2 de la sous-section B de cette section VI est réputée avoir le libellé suivant :








2. EENF








Le terme « EENF » (entité étrangère non financière) désigne toute entité non américaine qui n’est pas une IFE, au sens donné au terme « FFI » dans les Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, ou qui est une entité visée à l’alinéa 4j) de la sous-section B de la présente section. Il comprend toute entité non américaine qui, selon le cas :








a) réside au Canada et n’est pas une institution financière particulière au sens de la partie XVIII de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu;








b) réside dans une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada et n’est pas une institution financière.














U.S. indicia



(5) For the purposes of paragraphs (2)(a) and (b), subparagraph (2)(c)(ii), paragraph (3)(a) and subparagraph (3)(b)(ii), subparagraph B(3) of section II of Annex I to the agreement is to be read as follows:









(5) Pour l’application des alinéas (2)a) et b), du sous-alinéa (2)c)(ii), de l’alinéa (3)a) et du sous-alinéa (3)b)(ii), le paragraphe 3 de la sous-section B de la section II de l’annexe I de l’accord est réputé avoir le libellé suivant :



Indices américains












3. If any of the U.S indicia listed in subparagraph B(1) of this section are discovered in the electronic search, or if there is a change in circumstances that results in one or more U.S. indicia being associated with the account, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must seek to obtain or review the information described in the portion of subparagraph B(4) of this section that is relevant in the circumstances and must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless one of the exceptions in subparagraph B(4) applies with respect to that account.









3. Si l’examen des données par voie électronique révèle la présence de l’un quelconque des indices américains énumérés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section ou s’il se produit un changement de circonstances ayant pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains sont associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit examiner ou tenter d’obtenir les renseignements visés dans la partie du paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section qui s’applique dans les circonstances et doit considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, à moins que l’une des exceptions figurant à ce paragraphe 4 s’applique à ce compte.












Financial institution



(6) For the purpose of applying the procedures referred to in paragraphs (2)(d) and (e) and (3)(c) and (d) to a financial account of an account holder that is resident in Canada, the definition “Financial Institution” in subparagraph 1(g) of Article 1 of the agreement is to be read as follows:









(6) Pour l’application des procédures mentionnées aux alinéas (2)d) et e) et (3)c) et d) au compte financier d’un titulaire de compte qui réside au Canada, la définition de « institution financière », à l’alinéa 1g) de l’article 1 de l’accord, est réputée avoir le libellé suivant :



Institution financière












g) The term “Financial Institution” means any Entity that is a Custodial Institution, a Depository Institution, an Investment Entity or a Specified Insurance Company, and that is a listed financial institution within the meaning of Part XVIII of the Income Tax Act.









g) Le terme « institution financière » désigne une entité — établissement de garde de valeurs, établissement de dépôt, entité d’investissement ou compagnie d’assurance particulière — qui est une institution financière particulière au sens de la partie XVIII de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.












Dealer accounts



(7) Subsection (8) applies to a reporting Canadian financial institution in respect of a client name account maintained by the institution if








(a) property recorded in the account is also recorded in a financial account (in this subsection and subsection (8) referred to as the “related account”) maintained by a financial institution (in this subsection and subsection (8) referred to as the “dealer”) that is authorized under provincial legislation to engage in the business of dealing in securities or any other financial instrument, or to provide portfolio management or investment advising services; and








(b) the dealer has advised the institution whether the related account is a U.S. reportable account.








However, subsection (8) does not apply if it can reasonably be concluded by the institution that the dealer has failed to comply with its obligations under this section.









(7) Le paragraphe (8) s’applique à une institution financière canadienne déclarante relativement à un compte de nom de client qu’elle tient si, à la fois :



Comptes de courtiers




a) les biens portés au compte sont également portés à un compte financier (appelé « compte connexe » au présent paragraphe et au paragraphe (8)) tenu par une institution financière (appelée « courtier » à ces mêmes paragraphes) qui est autorisée en vertu de la législation provinciale à se livrer au commerce des valeurs mobilières ou d’autres instruments financiers ou à fournir des services de gestion de portefeuille ou de conseils en placement;








b) le courtier a fait savoir à l’institution financière si le compte connexe est un compte déclarable américain.








Toutefois, le paragraphe (8) ne s’applique pas si l’institution financière peut raisonnablement conclure que le courtier ne s’est pas conformé aux obligations qui lui sont imposées en vertu du présent article.














Dealer accounts



(8) If this subsection applies to a reporting Canadian financial institution in respect of a client name account,








(a) subsections (1) to (4) do not apply to the institution in respect of the account; and








(b) the institution shall rely on the determination of the dealer in respect of the related account in determining whether the account is a U.S. reportable account.









(8) En cas d’application du présent paragraphe à une institution financière canadienne déclarante relativement à un compte de nom de client :



Comptes de courtiers




a) les paragraphes (1) à (4) ne s’appliquent pas à l’institution financière relativement au compte;








b) l’institution financière se fie à la détermination faite par le courtier relativement au compte connexe pour déterminer si ce compte est un compte déclarable américain.














Reporting — U.S. reportable accounts



266. (1) Every reporting Canadian financial institution shall file with the Minister, before May 2 of each calendar year, an information return in prescribed form relating to each U.S. reportable account maintained by the institution at any time during the immediately preceding calendar year and after June 29, 2014.









266. (1) Toute institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de présenter au ministre, avant le 2 mai de chaque année civile, une déclaration de renseignements sur le formulaire prescrit concernant chaque compte déclarable américain tenu par elle au cours de l’année civile précédente et après le 29 juin 2014.



Déclaration —comptes déclarables américains










Reporting — nonparticipating financial institutions



(2) Every reporting Canadian financial institution shall file with the Minister, before May 2 of each calendar year, an information return in prescribed form relating to payments, to a nonparticipating financial institution that is the holder of a financial account maintained by the reporting Canadian financial institution, during the immediately preceding calendar year if the immediately preceding year is 2015 or 2016.









(2) Toute institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de présenter au ministre, avant le 2 mai de chaque année civile, une déclaration de renseignements sur le formulaire prescrit concernant les paiements faits au cours de l’année civile précédente — 2015 ou 2016 — à une institution financière non participante qui est titulaire d’un compte financier tenu par l’institution financière canadienne déclarante.



Déclaration— institutions financières non participantes










Filing of return



(3) An information return required under subsection (1) or (2) shall be filed by way of electronic filing.









(3) La production des déclarations de renseignements visées aux paragraphes (1) et (2) se fait par transmission électronique.



Production










Record keeping



267. (1) Every reporting Canadian financial institution shall keep, at the institution’s place of business or at such other place as may be designated by the Minister, records that the institution obtains or creates for the purpose of complying with this Part, including self-certifications and records of documentary evidence.









267. (1) L’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit tenir, à son lieu d’affaires ou à tout autre lieu désigné par le ministre, les registres qu’elle obtient ou crée pour se conformer à la présente partie, notamment les autocertifications et les preuves documentaires.



Tenue de registres










Form of records



(2) Every reporting Canadian financial institution required by this Part to keep records that does so electronically shall retain them in an electronically readable format for the retention period referred to in subsection (3).









(2) L’institution financière canadienne déclarante qui tient des registres, comme l’en oblige la présente partie, par voie électronique doit les conserver sous une forme électronique intelligible pendant la période mentionnée au paragraphe (3).



Forme des registres










Retention of records



(3) Every reporting Canadian financial institution that is required to keep, obtain, or create records under this Part shall retain those records for a period of at least six years following








(a) in the case of a self-certification, the last day on which a related financial account is open; and








(b) in any other case, the end of the last calendar year in respect of which the record is relevant.









(3) L’institution financière canadienne déclarante qui tient, obtient ou crée des registres, comme l’en oblige la présente partie, doit les conserver pendant une période minimale de six ans suivant :



Période minimale de conservation




a) dans le cas d’une autocertification, le dernier jour où un compte financier connexe est ouvert;








b) dans les autres cas, la fin de la dernière année civile à laquelle le registre se rapporte.














Anti-avoidance



268. If a person enters into an arrangement or engages in a practice, the primary purpose of which can reasonably be considered to be to avoid an obligation under this Part, the person is subject to the obligation as if the person had not entered into the arrangement or engaged in the practice.









268. La personne qui conclut une entente ou qui se livre à une pratique dont il est raisonnable de considérer que l’objet principal consiste à éviter une obligation prévue par la présente partie est assujettie à l’obligation comme si elle n’avait pas conclu l’entente ou ne s’était pas livrée à la pratique.



Anti-évitement










Deemed-compliant FFI



269. If a Canadian financial institution makes a reasonable determination that it is to be treated as a deemed-compliant FFI under Annex II to the agreement, this Part applies to the institution, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to the extent that the agreement imposes due diligence and reporting obligations on the institution.









269. Si une institution financière canadienne démontre de façon adéquate qu’elle doit être traitée comme une IFE réputée conforme en vertu de l’annexe II de l’accord, la présente partie s’applique à elle, avec les modifications nécessaires, dans la mesure où l’accord lui impose des obligations de diligence raisonnable et de déclaration.



IFE réputée conforme












(2) Subsection (1) comes into force on the day on which the agreement set out in the schedule to the Canada–United States Enhanced Tax Information Exchange Agreement Implementation Act enters into force.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) entre en vigueur à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’accord figurant à l’annexe de la Loi de mise en oeuvre de l’Accord Canada–États-Unis pour un meilleur échange de renseignements fiscaux.














PART 6









PARTIE 6












VARIOUS MEASURES









DIVERSES MESURES














Division 1









Section 1












Payments — Veterans Affairs









Paiements — Anciens Combattants












Earnings loss benefit



102. (1) A person who received an earnings loss benefit under subsection 18(1) or 22(1) of the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act for the period that began on May 29, 2012 and ended on September 30, 2012 — or who would have been eligible to receive that benefit if the disability pension paid to the person under the Pension Act for that period had not been taken into account — is entitled to receive an amount determined in accord-ance with the formula








A – B – C








where








A      is the amount of the earnings loss benefit that would have been paid to the person for that period if the disability pension paid to the person under the Pension Act for that period had not been taken into account;








B      is the amount of the earnings loss benefit that was paid to the person for that period; and








C      is the amount of long-term disability benefits that was paid or is payable under the Service Income Security Insurance Plan Long Term Disability to the person for that period as a result of the settlement order in Manuge v. Canada that was approved by the Federal Court on April 15, 2013.









102. (1) Est versée à la personne qui a reçu une allocation pour perte de revenus en vertu des paragraphes 18(1) ou 22(1) de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes pour la période commençant le 29 mai 2012 et se terminant le 30 septembre 2012 — ou qui aurait été admissible à recevoir une telle allocation si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte — la somme correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Allocation pour perte de revenus




A – B – C








où :








A      représente l’allocation pour perte de revenus qui lui aurait été versée pour cette période si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte;








B      l’allocation pour perte de revenus versée à la personne pour cette période;








C      toute prestation d’assurance-invalidité prolongée versée ou à verser en vertu du Régime d’assurance-revenu militaire à la personne pour cette période en raison de l’ordonnance de règlement dans l’affaire Manuge c. Canada approuvée par la Cour fédérale le 15 avril 2013.














Payment



(2) Any amount paid or payable under subsection (1) is deemed to be an earnings loss benefit paid or payable under the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act.









(2) Toute somme versée ou à verser au titre du paragraphe (1) est réputée être une allocation pour perte de revenus versée ou à verser en vertu de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes.



Versement










Canadian Forces income support benefit



103. (1) A person who received a Canadian Forces income support benefit un-der any of sections 27 to 31 of the Cana-dian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act for the period that began on May 29, 2012 and ended on September 30, 2012 — or who would have been eligible to receive that benefit if the disability pension paid to the person under the Pension Act for that period had not been taken into account — is entitled to receive an amount determined in accord-ance with the formula








A – B – C








where








A      is the amount of the Canadian Forces income support benefit that would have been paid to the person for that period if the disability pension paid to the person under the Pension Act for that period had not been taken into account;








B      is the amount of the Canadian Forces income support benefit that was paid to the person for that period; and








C      is the amount of long-term disability benefits that was paid or is payable under the Service Income Security Insurance Plan Long Term Disability to the person for that period as a result of the settlement order in Manuge v. Canada that was approved by the Federal Court on April 15, 2013.









103. (1) Est versée à la personne qui a reçu une allocation de soutien du revenu en vertu de l’un ou l’autre des articles 27 à 31 de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes pour la période commençant le 29 mai 2012 et se terminant le 30 septembre 2012 — ou qui aurait été admissible à recevoir une telle allocation si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte — la somme correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Allocation de soutien du revenu




A – B – C








où :








A      représente l’allocation de soutien du revenu qui lui aurait été versée pour cette période si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte;








B      l’allocation de soutien du revenu versée à la personne pour cette période;








C      toute prestation d’assurance-invalidité prolongée versée ou à verser en vertu du Régime d’assurance-revenu militaire à la personne pour cette période en raison de l’ordonnance de règlement dans l’affaire Manuge c. Canada approuvée par la Cour fédérale le 15 avril 2013.














Payment



(2) Any amount paid or payable under subsection (1) is deemed to be a Canadian Forces income support benefit paid or payable under the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act.









(2) Toute somme versée ou à verser au titre du paragraphe (1) est réputée être une allocation de soutien du revenu versée ou à verser en vertu de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes.



Versement










War veterans allowance



104. (1) A person who received an allowance under subsection 4(1) of the War Veterans Allowance Act for the period that began on May 29, 2012 and ended on September 30, 2013 — or who would have been eligible to receive that allowance if the disability pension paid to the person under the Pension Act or any similar or equivalent law of the country in whose forces the veteran served for that period had not been taken into account — is entitled to receive an amount determined in accordance with the formula








A – B








where








A      is the amount of the allowance that would have been paid to the person for that period if the disability pension paid to or in respect of the veteran under the Pension Act or any similar or equivalent law of the country in whose forces the veteran served for that period had not been taken into account; and








B      is the amount of the allowance that was paid to the person for that period.









104. (1) Est versée à la personne qui a reçu une allocation en vertu du paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur les allocations aux anciens combattants pour la période commençant le 29 mai 2012 et se terminant le 30 septembre 2013 — ou qui aurait été admissible à recevoir une telle allocation si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions ou de toute loi semblable ou équivalente dans le pays dans les forces duquel l’ancien combattant a servi pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte — la somme correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Allocation aux anciens combattants




A – B








où :








A      représente l’allocation qui lui aurait été versée pour cette période si la pension d’invalidité versée à l’ancien combattant, ou à son égard, en vertu de la Loi sur les pensions ou de toute loi semblable ou équivalente dans le pays dans les forces duquel l’ancien combattant a servi pour cette période;








B      l’allocation versée à la personne pour cette période.














Payment



(2) Any amount paid or payable under subsection (1) is deemed to be an allowance paid or payable under the War Veterans Allowance Act.









(2) Toute somme versée ou à verser au titre du paragraphe (1) est réputée être une allocation versée ou à verser en vertu de la Loi sur les allocations aux anciens combattants.



Versement










Civilian war-related benefits



105. (1) A person who received a benefit under the Civilian War-related Benefits Act for the period that began on May 29, 2012 and ended on September 30, 2013 — or who would have been eligible to receive that benefit if the disability pension paid to the person under that Act for that period had not been taken into account — is entitled to receive an amount determined in accordance with the formula








A – B








where








A      is the amount of the benefit that would have been paid to the person for that period if the disability pension paid to the person under the Civilian War-related Benefits Act for that period had not been taken into account; and








B      is the amount of the benefit that was paid to the person for that period.









105. (1) Est versée à la personne qui a reçu une prestation en vertu de la Loi sur les prestations de guerre pour les civils pour la période commençant le 29 mai 2012 et se terminant le 30 septembre 2013 — ou qui aurait été admissible à recevoir une telle prestation si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de cette loi pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte — la somme correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Prestations de guerre pour les civils




A – B








où :








A      représente la prestation qui lui aurait été versée pour cette période si la pension d’invalidité lui ayant été versée en vertu de la Loi sur les prestations de guerre pour les civils pour cette période n’avait pas été prise en compte;








B      la prestation versée à la personne pour cette période.














Payment



(2) Any amount paid or payable under subsection (1) is deemed to be a benefit paid or payable under the Civilian War-related Benefits Act.









(2) Toute somme versée ou à verser au titre du paragraphe (1) est réputée être une prestation versée ou à verser en vertu de la Loi sur les prestations de guerre pour les civils.



Versement










Consolidated Revenue Fund



106. There shall be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, on the requisition of the Minister of Veterans Affairs, the amounts determined under sections 102 to 105.









106. À la demande du ministre des Anciens Combattants, il est payé sur le Trésor les sommes visées aux articles 102 à 105.



Trésor










Definitions



107. (1) The following definitions apply in this section.




“common-law partner”« conjoint de fait »



“common-law partner” means a person who is cohabiting with another person in a conjugal relationship and has done so for a period of at least one year.




“dependent child”« enfant à charge »



“dependent child”








(a) in the case of a payment made under section 102 or 103, has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act; and








(b) in the case of a payment made under section 104 or 105, has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the War Veterans Allowance Act.




“survivor”« survivant »



“survivor”, in relation to a deceased person, means 








(a) their spouse who was, at the time of the person’s death, residing with the person; or








(b) the person who was, at the time of the person’s death, the person’s common-law partner.









107. (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent article.



Définitions




« conjoint de fait » La personne qui vit avec la personne en cause dans une relation conjugale depuis au moins un an.



« conjoint de fait »“common-law partner”




« enfant à charge » S’entend :



« enfant à charge »“dependent child”




a) dans le cas des versements visés aux articles 102 et 103, au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les mesures de réinsertion et d’indemnisation des militaires et vétérans des Forces canadiennes;








b) dans le cas des versements visés aux articles 104 et 105, au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les allocations aux anciens combattants.








« survivant » Selon le cas :



« survivant »“survivor”




a) l’époux qui, au moment du décès de la personne en cause, résidait avec celle-ci;








b) la personne qui, au moment du décès de la personne en cause, était son conjoint de fait.














Couples living apart



(2) A spouse is deemed to be residing with the person and a common-law partner does not cease to be the person’s common-law partner, if it is established that they are living apart by reason only of








(a) one or both of them having to reside in a health care facility;








(b) circumstances of a temporary nature; or








(c) other circumstances that are not within the control of the person or the spouse or common-law partner.









(2) L’époux est considéré comme résidant avec la personne en cause et le conjoint de fait conserve sa qualité de conjoint de fait s’il est démontré que l’époux ou conjoint de fait ne vit pas avec la personne en cause pour l’une ou l’autre des raisons suivantes :



Couples séparés




a) le placement de l’un d’eux dans un établissement de santé;








b) une situation de nature temporaire;








c) d’autres circonstances indépendantes de leur volonté.














Deceased person



(3) If a person who is entitled to be paid an amount under any of sections 102 to 105 dies before the amount is paid, the following rules apply:








(a) if, at the time of death, there is a survivor, the survivor is entitled to 100% of the amount;








(b) if, at the time of death, there is no survivor, but there are one or more dependent children, each of those children is entitled to the amount obtained by dividing the amount to be paid by the number of those dependent children; and








(c) if, at the time of death, there is no survivor or dependent child, no amount is to be paid.









(3) Si la personne ayant droit à l’un des versements visés aux articles 102 à 105 décède avant que ce versement ne soit fait, les règles ci-après s’appliquent :



Personne décédée




a) si, au moment du décès, il y a un survivant, la somme lui est versée en entier;








b) si, au moment du décès, il n’y a pas de survivant, mais qu’il y a un ou plusieurs enfants à charge, chacun d’eux reçoit la somme résultant de la division de la somme à verser par le nombre d’enfants à charge;








c) si, au moment du décès, il n’y a ni survivant ni enfant à charge, aucune somme n’est versée.
















Division 2









Section 2












Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation









Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada










R.S., c. B-2



Bank of Canada Act









Loi sur la Banque du Canada



L.R., ch. B-2












108. Section 18 of the Bank of Canada Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (m):









108. L’article 18 de la Loi sur la Banque du Canada est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa m), de ce qui suit :














(m.1) act as a custodian of the financial assets of the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation;









m.1) agir à titre de dépositaire de l’actif financier de la Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada;










R.S., c. C-3



Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation Act









Loi sur la Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada



L.R., ch. C-3












109. The Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation Act is amended by adding the following after section 41:









109. La Loi sur la Société d’assurance-dépôts du Canada est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 41, de ce qui suit :












Interest may be paid



42. The Bank of Canada may pay interest on any money that the Corporation deposits with it.









42. La Banque du Canada peut verser des intérêts sur les fonds déposés auprès d’elle par la Société.



Versement d’intérêts












Division 3









Section 3












Regulatory Cooperation Council Initiative on Workplace Chemicals









Initiative du Conseil de coopération en matière de réglementation concernant les produits chimiques dans les lieux de travail










R.S., c. H-3



Amendments to the Hazardous Products Act









Modification de la Loi sur les produits dangereux



L.R., ch. H-3












110. The long title of the Hazardous Products Act is replaced by the following:









110. Le titre intégral de la Loi sur les produits dangereux est remplacé par ce qui suit :














An Act to prohibit the sale and importation of hazardous products that are intended for use, handling or storage in a work place









Loi interdisant la vente et l’importation de produits dangereux destinés à être utilisés, manutentionnés ou stockés dans les lieux de travail












2010, c. 21, s. 72(2)



111. (1) The definition ““controlled prod- uct” or “hazardous product”” in section 2 of the Act is repealed.









111. (1) La définition de « “produit contrôlé” » ou « “produit dangereux” », à l’article 2 de la même loi, est abrogée.



2010, ch. 21, par. 72(2)










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(2) The definitions “analyst”, “inspector” and “sell” in section 2 of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les définitions de « analyste », « inspecteur » et « vendre », à l’article 2 de la même loi, sont respectivement remplacées par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










“analyst”« analyste »



“analyst” means an individual designated as an analyst under subsection 21(1);




“inspector”« inspecteur »



“inspector” means an individual designated as an inspector under subsection 21(1);




“sell”« vendre »



“sell” includes








(a) offer for sale or distribution, expose for sale or distribution, have in possession for sale or distribution or distribute — whether for consideration or not — to one or more recipients, and








(b) make any transfer of possession that creates a bailment or, in Quebec, make any transfer of possession of a movable, for a specific purpose, without transferring ownership, and with the obligation to deliver the movable to a specified person or to return it, such as a transfer by means of a deposit, a lease, a pledge, a loan for use or a contract of carriage;









« analyste » Individu désigné à ce titre en application du paragraphe 21(1).



« analyste »“analyst”




« inspecteur » Individu désigné à ce titre en application du paragraphe 21(1).



« inspecteur »“inspector”




« vendre » Est notamment assimilé à l’acte de vendre le fait d’effectuer une offre de vente ou de distribution, d’exposer ou d’avoir en sa possession pour la vente ou la distribution, de distribuer à un ou plusieurs destinataires, que la distribution soit faite ou non pour une contrepartie, ou encore le transfert de possession constituant un baillement ou, au Québec, le transfert de détention d’un bien meuble, dans un but précis, sans transfert de propriété et avec l’obligation de remettre le bien au propriétaire ou à une personne précise, notamment le transfert effectué dans le cadre d’un contrat de dépôt, d’un contrat de louage, d’un gage, d’un prêt à usage ou d’un contrat de transport.



« vendre »“sell”












(3) Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(3) L’article 2 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :












“container”« contenant »



“container” includes a bag, barrel, bottle, box, can, cylinder, drum or similar package or receptacle but does not include a storage tank;




“document”« document »



“document” means anything on which information that is capable of being understood by an individual or being read by a computer or other device is recorded or marked;




“hazardous product”« produit dangereux »



“hazardous product” means any product, mixture, material or substance that is classified in accordance with the regulations made under subsection 15(1) in a category or subcategory of a hazard class listed in Schedule 2;




“label”« étiquette »



“label” means a group of written, printed or graphic information elements that relate to a hazardous product, which group is designed to be affixed to, printed on or attached to the hazardous product or the container in which the hazardous product is packaged;




“manufactured article”« article manufacturé »



“manufactured article” means any article that is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture, the intended use of which when in that form is dependent in whole or in part on its shape or design, and that, when being installed, if the intended use of the article requires it to be installed, and under normal conditions of use, will not release or otherwise cause an individual to be exposed to a hazardous product;




“mixture”« mélange »



“mixture” means a combination of, or a solution that is composed of, two or more ingredients that, when they are combined, do not react with each other, but excludes any such combination or solution that is a substance; 




“person”« personne »



“person” means an individual or an organization as defined in section 2 of the Criminal Code;




“prescribed”Version anglaise seulement



“prescribed”, for the purposes of Part II, means prescribed by regulations made under subsection 15(1), and, for the purposes of Part III, means prescribed by regulations made under section 27;




“review officer”« réviseur »



“review officer” means an individual designated as a review officer under section 26.2;




“safety data sheet”« fiche de données de sécurité »



“safety data sheet” means a document that contains, under the headings that, by virtue of the regulations made under subsection 15(1), are required to appear in the document, information about a hazardous product, including information related to the hazards associated with any use, handling or storage of the hazardous product in a work place;




“substance”« substance »



“substance” means any chemical element or chemical compound — that is in its natural state or that is obtained by a production process — whether alone or together with








(a) any additive that is necessary to preserve the stability of the chemical element or chemical compound,








(b) any solvent that is necessary to preserve the stability or composition of the chemical element or chemical compound, or








(c) any impurity that is derived from the production process;




“supplier”« fournisseur »



“supplier” means a person who, in the course of business, sells or imports a hazardous product;




“work place”« lieu de travail »



“work place” has the meaning assigned by regulations made under subsection 15(1).









« article manufacturé » Article fabriqué selon une forme ou une conception qui lui confère une destination spécifique et dont l’usage, en des conditions normales, et l’installation, si celle-ci est nécessaire pour l’usage auquel il est destiné, n’entraînent pas le rejet de produits dangereux ni aucune forme de contact d’un individu avec ces produits.



« article manufacturé »“manufactured article”




« contenant » Tout emballage ou récipient, à l’exclusion d’un réservoir de stockage, notamment un sac, un baril, une bouteille, une boîte, un tonneau, une cannette ou un cylindre.



« contenant »“container”




« document » Tout support sur lequel sont enregistrés ou inscrits des renseignements pouvant être compris par un individu ou lus par un ordinateur ou tout autre dispositif.



« document »“document”




« étiquette » Ensemble d’éléments d’information écrits, imprimés ou graphiques relatifs à un produit dangereux, conçu pour être apposé, imprimé, écrit ou fixé sur ce produit ou sur le contenant qui le renferme.



« étiquette »“label”




« fiche de données de sécurité » Document qui contient, sous les rubriques devant y figurer en application des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1), des renseignements sur un produit dangereux, notamment sur les dangers associés à son utilisation, à sa manutention ou à son stockage dans le lieu de travail.



« fiche de données de sécurité »“safety data sheet”




« fournisseur » Personne qui, dans le cadre de ses affaires, importe ou vend des produits dangereux.



« fournisseur »“supplier”




« lieu de travail » S’entend au sens des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1).



« lieu de travail »“work place”




« mélange » Combinaison d’au moins deux ingrédients ne réagissant pas entre eux et qui n’est pas une substance ou solution qui est composée d’au moins deux de ces ingrédients et qui n’est pas une substance.



« mélange »“mixture”




« personne » Individu ou organisation au sens de l’article 2 du Code criminel.



« personne »“person”




« produit dangereux » Produit, mélange, matière ou substance classés conformément aux règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) dans une des catégories ou sous-catégories des classes de danger inscrites à l’annexe 2.



« produit dangereux »“hazardous product”




« réviseur » Individu désigné à ce titre en vertu de l’article 26.2.



« réviseur »“review officer”




« substance » Tout élément chimique ou composé chimique — à l’état naturel ou obtenu grâce à un procédé de production — qu’il soit présent isolément ou combiné à un additif pour en préserver la stabilité, ou à un solvant pour en préserver la stabilité ou la composition, ou à toute impureté issue du procédé de production.



« substance »“substance”










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 1999, c. 31, s. 127(E)



112. Section 11 of the Act and the headings before it are replaced by the following:









112. L’article 11 de la même loi et les intertitres le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 1999, ch. 31, art. 127(A)












PART II









PARTIE II












HAZARDOUS PRODUCTS









PRODUITS DANGEREUX












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 2002, c. 28, s. 86



113. (1) Paragraphs 12(a) to (c) of the Act are repealed.









113. (1) Les alinéas 12a) à c) de la même loi sont abrogés.



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 2002, ch. 28, art. 86










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(2) Paragraph 12(e) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 12e) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1












(e) hazardous waste, being a hazardous product that is sold for recycling or recovery or is intended for disposal;









e) de résidus dangereux qui sont des produits dangereux vendus pour être recyclés ou récupérés ou destinés à être éliminés;












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 2010, c. 21, s. 74



(3) Paragraphs 12(f) and (g) of the Act are repealed.









(3) Les alinéas 12f) et g) de la même loi sont abrogés.



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 2010, ch. 21, art. 74












(4) Section 12 of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (h), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (i) and by adding the following after paragraph (i):









(4) L’article 12 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa i), de ce qui suit :














(j) anything listed in Schedule 1.









j) de toute chose mentionnée à l’annexe 1.












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 1999, c. 31, s. 128(F)



114. Sections 13 and 14 of the Act are replaced by the following:









114. Les articles 13 et 14 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 1999, ch. 31, art. 128(F)










Prohibition re sale



13. (1) Subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, no supplier shall sell a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada unless








(a) the supplier has in their possession a safety data sheet for the hazardous product that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1);








(a.1) on the sale of the hazardous product to any person or government, the supplier provides to the person or government the safety data sheet referred to in paragraph (a), or causes it to be provided, if on that sale the person or government acquires possession or ownership of that hazardous product; and








(b) the hazardous product or the container in which the hazardous product is packaged has a label that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1) affixed to it, printed on it or attached to it in a manner that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under that subsection.









13. (1) Sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, il est interdit à tout fournisseur de vendre un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada, à moins de satisfaire aux exigences suivantes :



Interdiction de vente




a) il a en sa possession une fiche de données de sécurité du produit qui est conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1);








a.1) lors de la vente du produit, il fournit cette fiche ou veille à ce qu’elle soit fournie à toute personne ou administration qui, à ce moment, prend possession du produit ou en devient propriétaire;








b) une étiquette conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) est apposée, imprimée, écrite ou fixée sur le produit ou le contenant qui le renferme, conformément aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1).














Definition of “government”



(2) In this section, “government” means any of the following or their institutions:








(a) the federal government;








(b) a corporation named in Schedule III to the Financial Administration Act;








(c) a provincial government or a public body established under an Act of the legislature of a province; and








(d) an aboriginal government as defined in subsection 13(3) of the Access to Information Act.









(2) Au présent article, « administration » s’entend de l’administration fédérale, d’une société mentionnée à l’annexe III de la Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques, d’une administration provinciale, d’un organisme public constitué sous le régime d’une loi provinciale, d’un gouvernement autochtone au sens du paragraphe 13(3) de la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou de l’un de leurs organismes.



Définition de « administration »










Prohibition re importation



14. Subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, no supplier shall import a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada unless








(a) the supplier obtains or prepares, on or before the importation of the hazardous product, a safety data sheet for the hazardous product that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1); and








(b) the hazardous product or the container in which the hazardous product is packaged has a label that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1) affixed to it, printed on it or attached to it in a manner that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under that subsection.









14. Sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, il est interdit à tout fournisseur d’importer un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada, à moins de satisfaire aux exigences suivantes :



Interdiction d’importation




a) lors de l’importation du produit ou avant son importation, le fournisseur obtient une fiche de données de sécurité du produit qui est conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) ou prépare une telle fiche;








b) une étiquette conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) est apposée, imprimée, écrite ou fixée sur le produit dangereux ou le contenant qui le renferme, conformément aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1).














Prohibition re sale



14.1 (1) Despite section 13, no supplier shall sell a hazardous product that contains asbestos and is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada unless, subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, the supplier complies with the requirements set out in paragraphs 13(1)(a) to (b) and the hazardous product meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(2).









14.1 (1) Malgré l’article 13, il est interdit à tout fournisseur de vendre un produit dangereux qui contient de l’amiante et qui est destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada à moins que, sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, le fournisseur ne satisfasse aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 13(1)a) à b) et que le produit dangereux ne soit conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2).



Interdiction de vente










Prohibition re importation



(2) Despite section 14, no supplier shall import a hazardous product that contains asbestos and is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada unless, subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, the supplier complies with the requirements set out in paragraphs 14(a) and (b) and the hazardous product meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(2).









(2) Malgré l’article 14, il est interdit à tout fournisseur d’importer un produit dangereux qui contient de l’amiante et qui est destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada à moins que, sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, le fournisseur ne satisfasse aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 14a) et b) et que le produit dangereux ne soit conforme aux exigences prévues par règlement pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2).



Interdiction d’importation










False information — hazardous product or container



14.2 (1) No supplier shall sell or import a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada if the hazardous product or the container in which the hazardous product is packaged has affixed to, printed on or attached to it information about the hazardous product that is false, misleading or likely to create an erroneous impression, with respect to the information that is required to be included in a label or safety data sheet for that hazardous product in order for the supplier to comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 13(1)(a) to (b) or 14(a) and (b), as the case may be.









14.2 (1) Il est interdit à tout fournisseur de vendre ou d’importer un produit dangereux qui est destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada si des renseignements apposés, imprimés, écrits ou fixés sur le produit ou le contenant qui le renferme sont faux, trompeurs ou susceptibles de créer une fausse impression en ce qui a trait aux renseignements qui doivent figurer sur l’étiquette ou la fiche de données de sécurité du produit pour lui permettre de satisfaire aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 13(1)a) à b) ou 14a) et b), selon le cas.



Faux renseignements— produit dangereux ou son contenant










Safety data sheet — sale



(2) No supplier shall sell a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada if the safety data sheet for the hazardous product that is in their possession in order to comply with the requirement set out in paragraph 13(1)(a), or that they provide or cause to be provided in order to comply with the requirement set out in paragraph 13(1)(a.1), is false, misleading or likely to create an erroneous impression, with respect to the information that is required to be included in a label or safety data sheet for that hazardous product in order for the supplier to meet the requirements set out in paragraphs 13(1)(a) to (b).









(2) Il est interdit à tout fournisseur de vendre un produit dangereux qui est destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada si la fiche de données de sécurité qu’il a en sa possession afin de se conformer aux exigences prévues à l’alinéa 13(1)a), ou qu’il fournit ou veille à ce qu’elle soit fournie, pour lui permettre de satisfaire aux exigences prévues à l’alinéa 13(1)a.1), est fausse, trompeuse ou susceptible de créer une fausse impression en ce qui a trait aux renseignements qui doivent figurer sur l’étiquette ou la fiche de données de sécurité pour que le fournisseur puisse satisfaire aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 13(1)a) à b).



Fiche de données de sécurité — vente










Safety data sheet — importation



(3) No supplier shall import a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada if the safety data sheet for the hazardous product that the supplier obtains or prepares in order to comply with the requirement set out in paragraph 14(a) is false, misleading or likely to create an erroneous impression, with respect to the information that is required to be included in a label or safety data sheet for that hazardous product in order for the supplier to comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 14(a) and (b).









(3) Il est interdit à tout fournisseur d’importer un produit dangereux qui est destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada si la fiche de données de sécurité qu’il obtient ou prépare afin de se conformer aux exigences prévues à l’alinéa 14a) est fausse, trompeuse ou susceptible de créer une fausse impression en ce qui a trait aux renseignements qui doivent figurer sur l’étiquette ou la fiche de données de sécurité pour lui permettre de satisfaire aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 14a) et b).



Fiche de données de sécurité —importation










Course of sale



(4) No supplier who sells a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada shall, in the course of selling the hazardous product, communicate by any means any information about the hazardous product that is false, misleading or likely to create an erroneous impression, with respect to the information that is required to be included in a label or safety data sheet for that hazardous product in order for the supplier to comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 13(1)(a) to (b).









(4) Il est interdit à tout fournisseur qui vend un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada de communiquer, dans le cadre de la vente, des renseignements faux, trompeurs ou susceptibles de créer une fausse impression en ce qui a trait aux renseignements qui doivent figurer sur l’étiquette ou la fiche de données de sécurité pour lui permettre de satisfaire aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 13(1)a) à b).



Au cours de la vente










Preparing and Maintaining Documents









Tenue de documents












Requirements



14.3 (1) Every supplier who sells or imports a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada shall prepare and maintain








(a) a document containing a true copy of a label that represents the label that is affixed to, printed on or attached to the hazardous product or the container in which the hazardous product is packaged in order to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 13(1)(b) or 14(b), as the case may be, when they sell or import the hazardous product;








(b) a document containing a true copy of a safety data sheet for the hazardous product that represents the safety data sheet that is in their possession in order to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 13(1)(a) or that they obtain or prepare in order to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 14(a), as the case may be, when they sell or import the hazardous product;








(c) if the supplier obtained the hazardous product from another person, a document that indicates the person’s name and address, the quantity of the hazardous product obtained by the supplier and the month and year in which they obtained it;








(d) a document that indicates, for any sales of the hazardous product that result in a transfer of ownership or possession, the locations at which those sales took place, the period during which they took place, and, for each month in that period, the quantity sold during the month; and








(e) the prescribed documents.









14.3 (1) Le fournisseur qui vend ou importe un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada tient :



Obligation




a) un document dans lequel figure une copie conforme d’une étiquette qui représente l’étiquette qui, au moment de la vente ou de l’importation, est apposée, imprimée, écrite ou fixée sur le produit ou sur son contenant pour satisfaire aux exigences prévues aux alinéas 13(1)b) ou 14b), selon le cas;








b) un document dans lequel figure une copie conforme de la fiche de données de sécurité du produit qui, au moment de la vente ou de l’importation, représente celle qu’il a en sa possession pour satisfaire aux exigences prévues à l’alinéa 13(1)a) ou qu’il obtient ou prépare pour satisfaire aux exigences prévues à l’alinéa 14a), selon le cas;








c) s’il a obtenu le produit dangereux d’une autre personne, un document indiquant les nom et adresse de celle-ci, le mois et l’année d’obtention du produit et la quantité obtenue;








d) un document indiquant, pour toutes les ventes qui entraînent un transfert de possession ou de propriété du produit, le lieu où celui-ci a été vendu, la période pendant laquelle il l’a été et, pour chaque mois de cette période, la quantité vendue;








e) les documents prévus par règlement pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1).














Period for keeping documents



(2) The supplier shall keep the documents for six years after the end of the year to which they relate or for any other period that may be prescribed.









(2) Le fournisseur conserve les documents pendant la période de six ans suivant la fin de l’année à laquelle ils se rapportent ou pendant toute autre période fixée par règlement pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1).



Période de conservation










Keeping and providing documents



(3) The supplier shall keep the documents at the supplier’s place of business in Canada or at any prescribed place and shall, on written request, within the time and in the manner specified in the request, provide them to the Minister or an inspector.









(3) Il les conserve à son établissement au Canada ou en tout lieu prévu par règlement pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) et, sur demande écrite, les fournit au ministre ou à l’inspecteur dans le délai et selon les modalités précisés dans la demande.



Lieu de conservation et fourniture










Exemption — outside Canada



(4) The Minister may, subject to any terms and conditions that he or she may specify, exempt a supplier from the requirement to keep documents in Canada if the Minister considers it unnecessary or impractical for the supplier to keep them in Canada.









(4) Le ministre peut toutefois, aux conditions qu’il précise, exempter tout fournisseur de l’obligation de conserver les documents au Canada dans les cas où le ministre l’estime inutile ou peu commode.



Exception — lieu à l’extérieur du Canada










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1; 1999, c. 31, s. 129



115. (1) Paragraphs 15(1)(a) to (e) of the Act are replaced by the following:









115. (1) Les alinéas 15(1)a) à e) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1; 1999, ch. 31, art. 129












(a) defining, for the purposes of Schedule 2, any word or expression used in Schedule 2 but not defined in this Act;






(a.1) establishing, for any hazard class listed in Schedule 2, categories and subcategories of that hazard class;






(b) respecting the classification of products, mixtures, materials and substances in a category or subcategory of a hazard class listed in Schedule 2;






(c) respecting safety data sheets;






(c.1) respecting labels;






(d) respecting the preparation and maintenance of documents, including by specifying the documents to be prepared and maintained, where they are to be kept and for how long;









a) définir, pour l’application de l’annexe 2, le sens de tout terme utilisé dans cette annexe mais non défini dans la présente loi;






a.1) déterminer les catégories et sous-catégories des classes de danger inscrites à l’annexe 2;






b) prévoir toute mesure concernant la classification des produits, mélanges, matières ou substances dans chacune des catégories ou sous-catégories des classes de danger inscrites à l’annexe 2;






c) prévoir toute mesure concernant les fiches de données de sécurité;






c.1) prévoir toute mesure concernant les étiquettes;






d) prévoir toute mesure concernant la tenue de documents, notamment en précisant les documents à tenir ainsi que leurs période et lieu de conservation;












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(2) Paragraphs 15(1)(f) to (h) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les alinéas 15(1)f) à h) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1












(f) exempting from the application of this Part and the regulations made under this subsection or any provision of this Part or those regulations, on any terms and conditions that may be specified in those regulations,






(i) the sale or importation of any hazard- ous product or class of hazardous prod- ucts either generally or in the quantities or concentrations, in the circumstances, at the places, premises or facilities, for the purposes or in the containers that are specified in those regulations, and






(ii) any class of suppliers;









f) soustraire à l’application de la présente partie et des règlements pris en vertu du présent paragraphe ou de certaines de leurs dispositions, selon les conditions et modalités qui peuvent être fixées par ces règlements :






(i) la vente ou l’importation de tout produit dangereux ou catégorie de produits dangereux d’une façon générale ou selon des critères spécifiques relatifs à la quantité ou à la concentration de ce produit, aux circonstances, aux lieux ou installations, aux objectifs ou aux contenants,






(ii) toute catégorie de fournisseurs;












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(3) Paragraphs 15(1)(i) to (l) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(3) Les alinéas 15(1)i) à l) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1












(i) defining the expression “work place” for the purposes of this Part;






(j) requiring any supplier who sells or imports a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada to provide, as soon as feasible, any information that is included in the safety data sheet that is in the supplier’s possession for the hazardous product to any prescribed safety professional or health professional who requests that information for a prescribed purpose;






(k) requiring a prescribed safety professional or health professional — to whom a supplier who sells or imports a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada has provided information about the hazardous product that the supplier is exempt from disclosing under any Act of Parliament — to keep confidential, except for the purpose for which it is provided, any of that information that the supplier specifies as being confidential, if that information was provided at the request of the safety professional or health professional for a prescribed purpose;






(l) subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, requiring any supplier who sells or imports a hazardous product that is intended for use, handling or storage in a work place in Canada to identify, as soon as feasible, on request of any person within a class of persons specified in the regulations made under this subsection, the source for any toxicological data used in the preparation of any safety data sheet that the supplier has provided or caused to be provided in order to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 13(1)(a.1) or has obtained or prepared in order to meet the requirement set out in paragraph 14(a), as the case may be;









i) définir l’expression « lieu de travail » pour l’application de la présente partie;






j) obliger le fournisseur qui vend ou importe un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada à fournir, aussitôt que possible selon les circonstances, les renseignements qui figurent sur la fiche de données de sécurité qu’il a en sa possession pour ce produit au professionnel de la santé ou de la sécurité prévu par règlement, qui lui en fait la demande à l’une des fins prévues par règlement;






k) obliger le professionnel de la santé ou de la sécurité prévu par règlement qui demande à un fournisseur qui vend ou importe un produit dangereux destiné à être utilisé, manutentionné ou stocké dans un lieu de travail au Canada de lui fournir des renseignements sur le produit dangereux à l’une des fins prévues par règlement à tenir confidentiels ceux de ces renseignements pour lesquels le fournisseur est soustrait à l’obligation de communication en application de toute loi fédérale et que celui-ci désigne comme devant être tenus confidentiels, sauf en ce qui concerne les fins auxquelles ils sont communiqués;






l) sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, obliger le fournisseur qui vend ou importe des produits dangereux destinés à être utilisés, manutentionnés ou stockés dans un lieu de travail au Canada à révéler, aussitôt que possible selon les circonstances, sur demande d’une personne faisant partie d’une catégorie de personnes désignée par règlement pris en vertu du présent paragraphe, la source des données toxicologiques utilisées pour la préparation de toute fiche de données de sécurité que le fournisseur a fournie ou a veillé à ce qu’elle soit fournie, en conformité avec les exigences prévues à l’alinéa 13(1)a.1), ou qu’il a obtenue ou préparée en conformité avec les exigences prévues à l’alinéa 14a);












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(4) Subsections 15(2) and (3) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(4) Les paragraphes 15(2) et (3) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Regulations



(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations respecting the sale or importation of any hazardous product referred to in subsection 14.1(1) or (2).









(2) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, régir la vente ou l’importation d’un produit dangereux visé aux paragraphes 14.1(1) ou (2).



Règlements










Externally produced material



(3) A regulation made under subsection (1) or (2) may incorporate by reference documents produced by a person or body other than the Minister, including by








(a) an organization established for the purpose of writing standards, such as an organization accredited by the Standards Council of Canada;








(b) an industrial or trade organization; or








(c) a government.









(3) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement pris en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (2) tout document produit par un organisme ou une personne autre que le ministre, notamment :



Documents externes




a) tout organisme de normalisation, entre autres tout organisme agréé par le Conseil canadien des normes;








b) toute organisation commerciale ou industrielle;








c) toute administration.














Reproduced or translated material



(4) A regulation made under subsection (1) or (2) may incorporate by reference documents that the Minister reproduces or translates from documents produced by a person or body other than the Minister








(a) with any adaptations of form and reference that will facilitate their incorporation into the regulation; or








(b) in a form that sets out only the parts of them that apply for the purposes of the regulation.









(4) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement pris en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (2) tout document qui résulte de la reproduction ou de la traduction, par le ministre, d’un document produit par une autre personne ou un organisme et qui comporte, selon le cas :



Documents reproduits ou traduits




a) des adaptations quant à la forme et aux renvois destinées à en faciliter l’incorporation;








b) seulement les passages pertinents pour l’application du règlement.














Jointly produced documents



(5) A regulation made under subsection (1) or (2) may incorporate by reference documents that the Minister produces jointly with another government for the purpose of harmonizing the regulation with other laws.









(5) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement pris en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (2) tout document produit conjointement par le ministre et toute autre administration, en vue d’harmoniser le règlement avec d’autres règles de droit.



Documents produits conjointement










Internally produced standards



(6) A regulation made under subsection (1) or (2) may incorporate by reference technical or explanatory documents that the Minister produces, including








(a) specifications, classifications, illustrations, graphs or other information of a technical nature; and








(b) test methods, procedures, operational standards, safety standards or performance standards of a technical nature.









(6) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement pris en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (2) tout document technique ou explicatif produit par le ministre, notamment :



Normes techniques dans des documents internes




a) des spécifications, classifications, illustrations ou graphiques ou tout autre renseignement de nature technique;








b) des méthodes d’essai, procédures ou normes d’exploitation, de rendement ou de sécurité, de nature technique.














Incorporation as amended from time to time



(7) Documents may be incorporated by reference as amended from time to time.









(7) L’incorporation par renvoi peut viser le document avec ses modifications successives.



Portée de l’incorporation










For greater certainty



(8) Subsections (3) to (7) are for greater certainty and do not limit any authority to make regulations incorporating material by reference that exists apart from those subsections.









(8) Il est entendu que les paragraphes (3) à (7) n’ont pas pour objet d’empêcher la prise de règlements incorporant par renvoi des documents autres que ceux visés à ces paragraphes.



Interprétation










Definition of “government”



(9) In this section, “government” means any of the following or their institutions:








(a) the federal government;








(b) a corporation named in Schedule III to the Financial Administration Act;








(c) a provincial government or a public body established under an Act of the legislature of a province;








(d) an aboriginal government as defined in subsection 13(3) of the Access to Information Act;








(e) a government of a foreign state or of a subdivision of a foreign state; and








(f) an international organization of states.









(9) Au présent article, « administration » s’entend de l’administration fédérale, d’une société mentionnée à l’annexe III de la Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques, d’une administration provinciale, d’un organisme public constitué sous le régime d’une loi provinciale, d’un gouvernement autochtone au sens du paragraphe 13(3) de la Loi sur l’accès à l’information, d’une administration d’un État étranger ou d’une de ses subdivisions politiques ou d’une organisation internationale d’États, ou de l’un de leurs organismes.



Définition de « administration »










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



116. Section 16 of the Act is repealed.









116. L’article 16 de la même loi est abrogé.



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










2004, c. 15, s. 68



117. Subsection 16.1(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









117. Le paragraphe 16.1(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2004, ch. 15 art. 68










Interim orders — section 18



(2) The Minister may make an interim order in which any power referred to in section 18 is deemed to be exercised, if the Minister believes that immediate action is required to deal with a significant risk, direct or indirect, to health or safety.









(2) Pour les mêmes raisons, il peut également prendre un arrêté d’urgence dans lequel l’un des pouvoirs visés à l’article 18 est réputé être exercé.



Arrêtés d’urgence — article 18










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



118. Section 17 of the Act and the heading before it are repealed.









118. L’article 17 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont abrogés.



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



119. Section 18 of the Act and the heading before it are replaced by the following:









119. L’article 18 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Amendments to Schedules 1 and 2









Modification des annexes 1 et 2












Amendments to Schedules 1 and 2



18. Subject to section 19, the Governor in Council may, by order,








(a) amend Schedule 1 to add, delete or amend a reference to anything; and








(b) amend Schedule 2 to add, delete or amend a reference to a hazard class.









18. Sous réserve de l’article 19, le gouverneur en conseil peut, par décret :



Modification des annexes 1 et 2




a) modifier l’annexe 1 par adjonction, modification ou suppression de la mention de toute chose;








b) modifier l’annexe 2 par adjonction, modification ou suppression de la mention d’une classe de danger.














R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



120. Section 19 of the Act is replaced by the following:









120. L’article 19 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch.24, 3e suppl. art. 1










Consultation



19. A regulation under subsection 15(1) or an order under section 18 may be made by the Governor in Council only on the recommendation of the Minister made after consultation by the Minister with the government of each province and with any organizations represent-ative of workers, organizations representative of employers and organizations representative of suppliers that the Minister considers appropriate.









19. La prise des règlements d’application du paragraphe 15(1) et des décrets d’application de l’article 18 par le gouverneur en conseil sur recommandation du ministre est subordonnée à la consultation par celui-ci du gouvernement de chaque province et des organismes de représentation des travailleurs, des employeurs et des fournisseurs que le ministre estime indiqués.



Consultation










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



121. Section 20 of the Act and the heading before it are replaced by the following:









121. L’article 20 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Tests, Studies and Compilation of Information









Essais, études et compilation de renseignements












Minister’s order



20. (1) If the Minister has reasonable grounds to believe that a product, mixture, material or substance may be a hazardous product, the Minister may, in writing, order a person who is engaged in the business of selling or importing the product, mixture, material or substance to compile information relating to the formula, composition, chemical ingredients or hazardous properties of the product, mixture, material or substance, and any other information that the Minister considers necessary, for the purpose of determining whether the product, mixture, material or substance is or may be a danger to the health or safety of any individual who may handle it in a work place or be exposed to it in a work place.









20. (1) S’il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’un produit, un mélange, une matière ou une substance peut être un produit dangereux, le ministre peut ordonner, par écrit, à une personne qui s’adonne à la vente ou à l’importation de ce produit, de ce mélange, de cette matière ou de cette substance, de compiler les renseignements relatifs à la formule, à la composition, aux ingrédients chimiques ou aux propriétés dangereuses de ce produit, de ce mélange, de cette matière ou de cette substance ainsi que les autres renseignements que le ministre estime nécessaires afin de déterminer si ce produit, ce mélange, cette matière ou cette substance présente ou est susceptible de présenter un danger pour la santé ou la sécurité de tout individu qui peut les manipuler dans un lieu de travail ou y être exposé.



Ordre du ministre










Minister’s order



(1.1) If the Minister has reasonable grounds to believe that a person is engaged in the business of selling or importing a product, mixture, material or substance that is a hazard-ous product, the Minister may, in writing, order the person to








(a) conduct tests or studies on the product, mixture, material or substance to obtain the information that the Minister considers nec-essary to verify compliance or prevent non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or of the regulations made under subsection 15(1) or (2); and








(b) compile any information related to the formula, composition, chemical ingredients or hazardous properties of the product, mixture, material or substance that the Minister considers necessary to verify compliance or prevent non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or of the regulations made under subsection 15(1) or (2).









(1.1) Le ministre peut, s’il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’une personne s’adonne à la vente ou à l’importation d’un produit, d’un mélange, d’une matière ou d’une substance qui est un produit dangereux, ordonner par écrit à cette personne :



Ordre du ministre




a) d’effectuer des essais ou études sur le produit, le mélange, la matière ou la substance en vue d’obtenir les renseignements qu’il estime nécessaires pour vérifier le respect des dispositions de la présente loi et des règlements pris en vertu des paragraphes 15(1) ou (2) ou pour en prévenir le non-respect;








b) de compiler tout renseignement relatif à la formule, à la composition, aux ingrédients chimiques ou aux propriétés dangereuses du produit, du mélange, de la matière ou de la substance qu’il estime nécessaire pour vérifier le respect des dispositions de la présente loi et des règlements pris en vertu des paragraphes 15(1) ou (2) ou pour en prévenir le non-respect.














Providing information to Minister



(2) Every person to whom an order under subsection (1) or (1.1) is directed shall provide to the Minister, in the time, form and manner specified in the order, the information or the results of the tests or studies that are required by the order.









(2) Le destinataire de l’ordre transmis en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (1.1) est tenu de communiquer au ministre, dans le délai et selon les modalités de forme ou autres qui y sont spécifiés, les renseignements ou les résultats des essais ou études qui y sont exigés.



Transmission de renseignements au ministre










Information privileged



(3) Subject to subsection (4), information received by the Minister from a person under subsection (1) or (1.1) is privileged and, notwithstanding the Access to Information Act or any other Act or law, shall not be disclosed to any other person except as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Act or for the purposes of section 15.









(3) Sous réserve du paragraphe (4), les renseignements que le ministre reçoit d’une personne en application des paragraphes (1) ou (1.1) sont protégés et, par dérogation à la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou à toute autre règle de droit, ne peuvent être communiqués à d’autres que dans la mesure nécessaire à l’exécution et au contrôle d’application de la présente loi ou pour l’application de l’article 15.



Renseignements protégés










Information privileged



(4) The Minister shall not, when carrying out the consultations referred to in section 19, for the purposes of subsection 15(1), disclose the name of any person from whom the Minister has received information under subsection (1) or (1.1) or any of that information that is specified, in writing, by the person as being confidential.









(4) Le ministre ne peut, lors des consultations visées à l’article 19 pour l’application du paragraphe 15(1), divulguer le nom de la personne de qui il a reçu les renseignements en application des paragraphes (1) ou (1.1) et tout autre renseignement reçu en application de ces paragraphes que cette personne désigne par écrit comme étant confidentiels.



Renseignements protégés










Statutory Instruments Act



(5) For greater certainty, orders made under subsection (1) or (1.1) are not statutory instruments within the meaning of the Statutory Instruments Act.









(5) Il est entendu que les ordres donnés en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (1.1) ne sont pas des textes réglementaires au sens de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires.



Loi sur les textes réglementaires










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



122. (1) Subsection 21(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









122. (1) Le paragraphe 21(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Inspectors and analysts



21. (1) The Minister may designate as an inspector or analyst for the purposes of any provision of this Act or of the regulations any individual or class of individuals who, in the Minister’s opinion, is qualified to be so designated. However, if the individual is employed by a provincial government, or a public body established under an Act of the legislature of a province, the Minister may make the designation only after obtaining the approval of that government or public body.









21. (1) Pour l’application de toute disposition de la présente loi ou des règlements, le ministre peut désigner à titre d’inspecteur ou d’analyste tout individu — personnellement ou au titre de son appartenance à une catégorie donnée — qu’il estime qualifié. Si l’individu est l’employé d’une administration provinciale ou d’un organisme public constitué sous le régime d’une loi provinciale, le ministre doit obtenir l’approbation de l’administration ou de l’organisme public avant de procéder à sa désignation.



Désignation










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



(2) Subsection 21(2) of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 21(2) de la version anglaise de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch.24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Certificate to be produced



(2) The Minister shall furnish every inspector with a certificate of designation and, on entering any place in accordance with subsection 22(1), an inspector shall, on request, produce the certificate to the person in charge of that place.









(2) The Minister shall furnish every inspector with a certificate of designation and, on entering any place in accordance with subsection 22(1), an inspector shall, on request, produce the certificate to the person in charge of that place.



Certificate to be produced












(3) Section 21 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(3) L’article 21 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Objectives, guidelines and codes of practice



(3) The Minister may establish objectives, guidelines and codes of practice respecting the exercise of an inspector’s or analyst’s powers, and the performance of an inspector’s or analyst’s duties or functions, under this Act.









(3) Le ministre peut établir des objectifs, lignes directrices et codes de pratique pour régir l’exercice des attributions des inspecteurs ou des analystes au titre de la présente loi.



Objectifs, directives et codes de pratique










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



123. The heading before section 22 and sections 22 to 26 of the Act are replaced by the following:









123. L’intertitre précédant l’article 22 et les articles 22 à 26 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Inspection and Analysis









Inspection et analyse












Powers of inspectors



22. (1) Subject to subsection 22.1(1), an inspector may, for a purpose related to verifying compliance or preventing non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or of the regulations, at any reasonable time enter any place, including a conveyance, in which the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that an activity regulated under this Act is conducted or a thing to which this Act applies is located, and may, for that purpose,








(a) examine or test any product, mixture, material or substance found in the place that the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe is a hazardous product and take samples of it, and examine any other thing that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds is used or is capable of being used for the manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging, sale, importation or storage of a hazardous product;








(b) open and examine any receptacle or package that is found in the place;








(c) examine a document that is found in the place, make a copy of it or take an extract from it;








(d) use or cause to be used a computer or other device that is at the place to examine a document that is contained in or available to a computer system or reproduce it or cause it to be reproduced in the form of a printout or other intelligible output and remove the output for examination or copying;








(e) use or cause to be used any copying equipment that is at the place and remove the copies for examination;








(f) take photographs and make recordings and sketches;








(g) order the owner or person having possession, care or control of any product, mixture, material or substance found in the place that the inspector has reasonable grounds to believe is a hazardous product to move it or, for any time that may be necessary, not to move it or to restrict its movement;








(h) order the owner or person having possession, care or control of the conveyance to move it or, for any time that may be necessary, not to move it or to restrict its movement;








(i) order the owner or person in charge of the place to establish their identity to the inspector’s satisfaction; and








(j) remove anything from the place for the purpose of examination, conducting tests or taking samples.









22. (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe 22.1(1), pour toute fin liée à la vérification du respect des dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements ou pour en prévenir le non-respect, l’inspecteur peut, à toute heure convenable, entrer dans tout lieu — y compris un moyen de transport — s’il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’une activité régie par la présente loi y est exercée ou qu’une chose visée par la présente loi s’y trouve. Il peut, à cette même fin :



Pouvoirs des inspecteurs




a) examiner ou mettre à l’essai tout produit, mélange, matière ou substance se trouvant dans le lieu et dont il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’il s’agit d’un produit dangereux et en prélever des échantillons, et examiner toute chose dont il a des motifs raisonnables de croire que celle-ci sert ou est destinée à servir à la fabrication, à la préparation, à la conservation, à l’emballage, à la vente, à l’importation ou au stockage d’un produit dangereux;








b) ouvrir et examiner tout récipient ou emballage qui se trouve dans ce lieu;








c) examiner tout document qui se trouve dans ce lieu et en faire des copies ou en prendre des extraits;








d) utiliser ou faire utiliser un ordinateur ou autre dispositif se trouvant dans ce lieu pour prendre connaissance des documents que tout système informatique contient ou auxquels il donne accès, reproduire ou faire reproduire ces documents sous forme d’imprimé ou toute autre forme intelligible et les emporter pour examen ou reproduction;








e) utiliser ou faire utiliser le matériel de reproduction se trouvant dans ce lieu et emporter les copies pour examen;








f) prendre des photographies, effectuer des enregistrements et faire des croquis;








g) ordonner au propriétaire ou à la personne qui a la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge de tout produit, mélange, matière ou substance se trouvant dans ce lieu, s’il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’il s’agit d’un produit dangereux, de le déplacer ou, pour aussi longtemps que nécessaire, de ne pas le déplacer ou d’en limiter le déplacement;








h) ordonner au propriétaire ou à la personne qui a la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge du moyen de transport de le déplacer ou de ne pas le déplacer ou d’en limiter le déplacement aussi longtemps que nécessaire;








i) ordonner au propriétaire ou au responsable du lieu d’établir, à sa satisfaction, son identité;








j) emporter toute chose se trouvant dans ce lieu afin de l’examiner, de la mettre à l’essai ou de prélever des échantillons.














Conveyance



(1.1) For the purpose of entering a conveyance, an inspector may order the owner or person having possession, care or control of the conveyance to stop it or move it to a place where the inspector can enter it.









(1.1) L’inspecteur peut ordonner au propriétaire du moyen de transport dans lequel il entend entrer ou à la personne qui en a la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge de l’immobiliser ou de le conduire en tout lieu où il peut y entrer.



Moyens de transport










Disposition of samples



(1.2) A sample taken under this section may be disposed of in any manner that an inspector considers appropriate.









(1.2) Il peut être disposé, notamment par destruction, des échantillons prélevés sous le régime du présent article de la façon que tout inspecteur l’estime indiquée.



Sort de l’échantillon










Individual accompanying inspector



(1.3) An inspector may be accompanied by any individual that they believe is necessary to help them exercise their powers or perform their duties or functions under this section.









(1.3) L’inspecteur peut être accompagné des individus qu’il estime nécessaires pour l’aider dans l’exercice de ses attributions au titre du présent article.



Individus accompagnant l’inspecteur










Entering private property



(1.4) An inspector who is exercising powers or performing duties or functions under this section and any individual accompanying them may enter private property — other than a dwelling-house — and pass through it in order to gain entry to a place referred to in subsection (1).









(1.4) L’inspecteur qui exerce ses attributions au titre du présent article et tout individu qui l’accompagne peuvent, afin d’accéder au lieu visé au paragraphe (1), pénétrer dans une propriété privée — autre qu’une maison d’habitation — et y circuler.



Droit de passage —propriété privée










Assistance to inspectors



(2) The owner or person in charge of the place and every person found in it shall give the inspector all reasonable assistance and provide the inspector with any information that the inspector may require for the purpose of exercising the inspector’s powers or performing the inspector’s duties or functions under this section.









(2) Le propriétaire ou le responsable du lieu, ainsi que quiconque s’y trouve, sont tenus de prêter à l’inspecteur toute l’assistance possible et de lui donner les renseignements qu’il peut exiger dans l’exercice de ses attributions au titre du présent article.



Assistance à l’inspecteur










Warrant or consent required to enter dwelling-house



22.1 (1) If the place mentioned in subsection 22(1) is a dwelling-house, an inspector is not authorized to enter it without the consent of the occupant except under the authority of a warrant issued under subsection (2).









22.1 (1) L’inspecteur ne peut entrer dans une maison d’habitation sans le consentement de l’occupant que s’il est muni du mandat prévu au paragraphe (2).



Mandat pour maison d’habitation ou consentement










Authority to issue warrant



(2) A justice of the peace may, on ex parte application, issue a warrant authorizing, subject to the conditions specified in the warrant, the individual who is named in it to enter a dwelling-house if the justice of the peace is satisfied by information on oath that








(a) the dwelling-house is a place described in subsection 22(1);








(b) entry to the dwelling-house is necessary for the purposes referred to in subsection 22(1); and








(c) entry to the dwelling-house was refused or there are reasonable grounds to believe that it will be refused or to believe that consent to entry cannot be obtained from the occupant.









(2) Sur demande ex parte, le juge de paix peut signer un mandat autorisant, sous réserve des conditions éventuellement fixées, l’individu qui y est nommé à entrer dans une maison d’habitation s’il est convaincu, sur la foi d’une dénonciation sous serment, que sont réunis les éléments suivants :



Délivrance du mandat




a) la maison d’habitation est un lieu visé au paragraphe 22(1);








b) la visite est nécessaire aux fins prévues à ce paragraphe;








c) soit l’entrée à été refusée à l’inspecteur par l’occupant, soit il y a des motifs raisonnables de croire que tel sera le cas ou qu’il est impossible d’obtenir le consentement de l’occupant.














Use of force



(3) In executing a warrant issued under subsection (2), the inspector shall not use force unless they are accompanied by a peace officer and the use of force is authorized in the warrant.









(3) L’inspecteur ne peut recourir à la force dans l’exécution du mandat que si celui-ci en autorise l’usage et que s’il est accompagné d’un agent de la paix.



Usage de la force










Telewarrant



(4) If an inspector believes that it would not be practical to appear personally to make an application for a warrant under subsection (2), the warrant may be issued by telephone or other means of telecommunication on application submitted by telephone or other means of telecommunication and section 487.1 of the Criminal Code applies for that purpose with any necessary modifications.









(4) L’inspecteur qui est d’avis qu’il serait peu commode de se présenter en personne devant le juge de paix pour demander le mandat visé au paragraphe (2) peut demander qu’il lui soit délivré par téléphone ou à l’aide d’un autre moyen de télécommunication, sur le fonde-ment d’une dénonciation transmise par l’un quelconque de ces moyens; l’article 487.1 du Code criminel s’applique alors avec les adaptations nécessaires.



Télémandats










Seizure



22.2 An inspector may seize and detain anything that they have reasonable grounds to believe








(a) was used in the contravention of any provision of this Act or of the regulations; or








(b) is something in relation to which a provision of this Act or of the regulations was contravened.









22.2 L’inspecteur peut saisir et retenir toute chose dont il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’elle a servi ou est liée à la contravention de toute disposition de la présente loi ou de ses règlements.



Saisie










Certain information privileged



22.3 All information that, under the Hazard-ous Materials Information Review Act, a supplier is exempt from disclosing under this Act and that is obtained by an inspector in the exercise of their powers or the performance of their duties or functions under this Act is privileged and, notwithstanding the Access to Information Act or any other Act or law, shall not be disclosed to any other person except for the purposes of the administration and enforcement of this Act.









22.3 Les renseignements pour lesquels un fournisseur est soustrait, en application de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, à l’obligation de communication applicable en vertu de la présente loi et qui sont obtenus par l’inspecteur dans l’exercice de ses attributions au titre de la présente loi sont protégés et ne peuvent, malgré la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou toute autre règle de droit, être communiqués à une autre personne, sauf pour l’exécution et le contrôle d’application de la présente loi.



Protection de certains renseignements










Analysis and examination



22.4 (1) An inspector may submit to an analyst, for analysis or examination, anything seized by the inspector, or any sample of it, or any samples taken by the inspector.









22.4 (1) L’inspecteur peut soumettre à l’analyste, pour analyse ou examen, les choses qu’il a saisies ou des échantillons de celles-ci ou les échantillons qu’il a lui-même prélevés.



Analyse et examen










Certificate or report



(2) An analyst who has made an analysis or examination may issue a certificate or report setting out the results of the analysis or examination.









(2) L’analyste peut, après analyse ou examen, délivrer un certificat ou un rapport où sont donnés ses résultats.



Certificat ou rapport










Obstruction



23. No person shall obstruct, or provide false or misleading information either orally or in writing to, an inspector while the inspector is exercising powers or performing duties or functions under the provisions of this Act or of the regulations.









23. Il est interdit à toute personne d’entraver l’action de l’inspecteur dans l’exercice de ses attributions au titre des dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements ou de lui fournir, oralement ou par écrit, des renseignements faux ou trompeurs.



Entrave et fausses déclarations










Dealing with Seized Things









Mesures relatives aux choses saisies












Storage of seized things



24. (1) An inspector who seizes a thing under this Act may








(a) on notice to and at the expense of its owner or the person having possession, care or control of it at the time of its seizure, store it at the place where it was seized or move it to, and store it at, another place; or








(b) order its owner or the person having possession, care or control of it at the time of its seizure to store it at their expense at the place where it was seized or to move it to, and store it at, another place at their expense.









24. (1) L’inspecteur qui saisit une chose en vertu de la présente loi peut :



Entreposage




a) l’entreposer dans le lieu où elle a été saisie ou la déplacer et l’entreposer dans un autre lieu, sur avis et aux frais de son propriétaire ou de la personne qui en avait la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge au moment de la saisie;








b) ordonner à son propriétaire ou à une telle personne de l’entreposer à ses frais dans le lieu où elle a été saisie ou de la déplacer et de l’entreposer à ses frais dans un autre lieu.














Interference



(2) Except with the authorization of an inspector, no person shall remove, alter or interfere in any way with a thing seized under this Act by an inspector.









(2) Il est interdit à toute personne, sans autorisation de l’inspecteur, de déplacer les choses saisies par celui-ci en vertu de la présente loi, ou d’en modifier l’état de quelque manière que ce soit.



Interdiction










Release of seized things



24.1 An inspector who seizes a thing under this Act shall release it if they are satisfied that the provisions of this Act and of the regulations that relate to it have been complied with.









24.1 L’inspecteur, après avoir constaté que les dispositions de la présente loi et des règlements applicables à une chose saisie en vertu de la présente loi ont été respectées, donne mainlevée de la saisie.



Mainlevée de saisie










Application for restoration



25. (1) If a thing has been seized under this Act, its owner or the person having possession, care or control of it at the time of its seizure may, within 120 days after the date of the seizure, on prior notice having been given in accordance with subsection (2) to the Minister, apply to a provincial court judge within whose territorial jurisdiction the seizure was made for an order of restoration under subsection (3).









25. (1) Le propriétaire d’une chose saisie en vertu de la présente loi ou la personne qui en avait la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge au moment de la saisie peut, dans les cent vingt jours suivant la date de saisie et après avoir adressé au ministre, à Ottawa, le préavis prévu au paragraphe (2), demander à un juge de la cour provinciale dans le ressort duquel la saisie a été faite de rendre l’ordonnance de restitution prévue au paragraphe (3) de toute chose saisie.



Demande de restitution










Notice to Minister



(2) The notice referred to in subsection (1) shall be delivered to the Minister at Ottawa at least 30 clear days before the day on which the application to the provincial court judge is to be made, by means of registered mail, a method of courier service that provides a record of delivery and requires a signature on delivery, or any other prescribed method, and shall specify








(a) the provincial court judge to whom the application is to be made;








(b) the place and time at which the application is to be heard;








(c) the thing in respect of which the application is to be made; and








(d) the evidence on which the applicant intends to rely to establish that








(i) the applicant was the owner or the person having possession, care or control of the thing at the time of its seizure, and








(ii) the thing was not used in the contravention of any provision of this Act or of the regulations and it is not something in relation to which a provision of this Act or of the regulations was contravened.









(2) Le préavis est transmis au ministre par courrier recommandé, par service de livraison par messager fournissant une preuve de livraison qui inclut une signature obtenue au moment de la livraison ou par toute autre méthode prévue par règlement pris en vertu de l’article 27, au moins trente jours francs avant la date de présentation de la demande à un juge d’une cour provinciale et précise :



Avis au ministre




a) le nom du juge de la cour provinciale à qui la demande sera faite;








b) les date, heure et lieu de présentation de la demande;








c) la chose qui fera l’objet de la demande;








d) les éléments de preuve sur lesquels le demandeur entend fonder :








(i) son droit de propriété ou de possession, sa responsabilité ou la charge qu’il avait de la chose au moment de la saisie,








(ii) ses prétentions selon lesquelles la chose n’a pas servi et n’est pas liée à la contravention des dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements.














Order of restoration



(3) Subject to section 26, the provincial court judge shall order that the thing seized be restored without delay to the applicant if, on the hearing of an application made under subsection (1), the judge is satisfied that








(a) the applicant was the owner or the person having possession, care or control of the thing at the time of its seizure;








(a.1) the thing was not used in the contravention of any provision of this Act or of the regulations and it is not something in relation to which a provision of this Act or of the regulations was contravened; and








(b) the thing is not and will not be required as evidence in any proceedings in respect of an offence under section 28.









(3) Sous réserve de l’article 26, le juge de la cour provinciale ordonne la restitution immédiate si, après audition de la demande, il est convaincu, à la fois :



Ordonnance de restitution




a) que le demandeur était le propriétaire de la chose ou qu’il en avait la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge au moment de la saisie;








a.1) que la chose n’a pas servi ou n’est pas liée à la contravention des dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements;








b) que la chose ne sert pas ou ne servira pas de preuve dans une procédure relative à une infraction prévue à l’article 28.














No application for restoration



(4) If no application has been made under subsection (1) for the restoration of a thing seized under this Act within 120 days after the date of the seizure, the Minister may dispose of it, at the expense of its owner or the person having possession, care or control of it at the time of its seizure, as the Minister thinks fit.









(4) Si aucune demande de restitution n’est faite dans les cent vingt jours qui suivent la date de saisie, le ministre peut disposer, notamment par destruction, de la chose saisie comme il l’entend, aux frais du propriétaire ou de la personne qui en avait la possession, la responsabilité ou la charge au moment de la saisie.



Absence de demande de restitution










Forfeiture — conviction for offence



26. (1) If a person has been convicted of an offence under section 28, the court may order that a thing seized under this Act by means of or in respect of which the offence was committed be forfeited to Her Majesty in right of Canada. The thing forfeited may be disposed of, as the Minister directs, at the expense of its owner, the person who was entitled to possession of it at the time of its seizure or the person who has been convicted of the offence.









26. (1) Sur déclaration de culpabilité de l’auteur de toute infraction prévue à l’article 28, le tribunal peut ordonner que toute chose saisie en vertu de la présente loi et qui a servi ou donné lieu à l’infraction soit confisquée au profit de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada; il peut en être disposé, notamment par destruction, aux frais de l’auteur de l’infraction, du propriétaire ou de la personne qui avait droit à sa possession au moment de la saisie, conformément aux instructions du ministre.



Confiscation sur déclaration de culpabilité










Forfeiture — consent of owner



(2) If the owner of a thing seized under this Act consents in writing to its forfeiture, the thing is forfeited to Her Majesty in right of Canada and may be disposed of, at the expense of its owner, as the Minister directs.









(2) Le propriétaire d’une chose saisie en vertu de la présente loi peut consentir par écrit à sa confiscation. La chose est dès lors confisquée au profit de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada et il peut en être disposé, notamment par destruction, aux frais du propriétaire conformément aux instructions du ministre.



Confiscation sur consentement










Orders for Taking Measures









Ordre de prise de mesures












Taking measures



26.1 (1) The Minister may order a supplier to take any measure that the Minister considers necessary to remedy a non-compliance, or to prevent non-compliance, with the provisions of this Act or of the regulations, if the Minister believes on reasonable grounds that any provision of this Act or of the regulations has been contravened in relation to the hazardous prod-uct.









26.1 (1) Le ministre peut ordonner au fournisseur de prendre toute mesure qu’il estime nécessaire pour remédier à un manquement aux dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements ou pour en prévenir le non-respect s’il a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu’il y a eu contravention aux dispositions de la présente loi ou de ses règlements relativement à un produit.



Prise de mesures










Measures



(2) The measures referred to in subsection (1) include measures related to the label or safety data sheet for the hazardous product or to stopping the sale or importation of the hazard-ous product or causing it to be stopped.









(2) Les mesures visées au paragraphe (1) concernent notamment la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette du produit dangereux ou la prise de toute mesure pour cesser ou faire cesser la vente ou l’importation du produit.



Mesures










Notice



(3) The order shall be provided in the form of a written notice that sets out the reasons for the measure and the time within which and manner in which the measure is to be carried out.









(3) L’ordre est communiqué sous forme d’avis écrit précisant les motifs ainsi que le délai et les modalités d’exécution.



Avis










Statutory Instruments Act



(4) For greater certainty, orders made under subsection (1) are not statutory instruments within the meaning of the Statutory Instruments Act.









(4) Il est entendu que les ordres donnés en vertu du paragraphe (1) ne sont pas des textes réglementaires au sens de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires.



Loi sur les textes réglementaires










Review of Orders for Taking Measures









Révision de l’ordre de prise de mesures












Review officer



26.2 The Minister may designate as a review officer for the purposes of reviewing orders under section 26.3 any individual or class of individuals who, in the Minister’s opinion, is qualified to be so designated.









26.2 Le ministre peut désigner à titre de réviseur tout individu — personnellement ou au titre de son appartenance à une catégorie donnée — qu’il estime compétent pour procéder aux révisions prévues à l’article 26.3.



Réviseurs










Request for review



26.3 (1) Subject to any other provision of this section, an order made under section 26.1 shall be reviewed by a review officer other than the individual who made the order, on the written request of the person who was ordered under it to take a measure, but only on grounds that involve questions of fact alone or questions of mixed law and fact.









26.3 (1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions du présent article, l’ordre donné en vertu de l’article 26.1 ne peut être révisé que sur des questions de fait ou des questions mixtes de fait et de droit, et ce, par un réviseur — autre que l’individu qui l’a donné — sur demande écrite de son destinataire.



Demande de révision










Contents of and time for making request



(2) The written request shall state the grounds for review and set out the evidence, including evidence that was not considered by the individual who made the order, that supports those grounds and the decision that is sought. It shall be delivered to the Minister within seven days after the day on which the order is provided under subsection 26.1(3).









(2) La demande est motivée, elle énonce les éléments de preuve à son appui — notamment les faits n’ayant pas été pris en considération par l’individu qui a donné l’ordre — ainsi que la décision demandée et elle est déposée auprès du ministre dans les sept jours suivant la date de la communication de l’ordre au titre du paragraphe 26.1(3).



Contenu de la demande et délai pour la déposer










No authority to review



(3) The review is not to be done if the request does not comply with subsection (2) or is frivolous, vexatious or not made in good faith.









(3) La révision est refusée si la demande ne satisfait pas au paragraphe (2) ou si elle est frivole, vexatoire ou entachée de mauvaise foi.



Refus










Reasons for refusal



(4) The person who made the request shall, without delay, be notified in writing of the reasons for not doing the review.









(4) Le refus est communiqué sans délai par écrit au demandeur, motifs à l’appui.



Motifs du refus










Review initiated by review officer



(5) A review officer — other than the indi- vidual who made the order — may review an order made under section 26.1, whether or not a request is made under subsection (1).









(5) Tout réviseur — autre que l’individu qui a donné l’ordre — peut procéder à la révision même en l’absence de la demande prévue au paragraphe (1).



Révision à l’initiative du réviseur










Order in effect



(6) An order made under section 26.1 continues to apply during a review unless the review officer decides otherwise.









(6) À moins que le réviseur n’en décide autrement, la révision n’a pas pour effet de suspendre la mise en oeuvre de l’ordre.



Absence de suspension










Completion of review



(7) A review officer shall complete the review no later than 30 days after the day on which the request is delivered to the Minister.









(7) Le réviseur termine la révision dans les trente jours suivant la date à laquelle la demande a été déposée.



Délai de la révision










Extension of period for review



(8) The review officer may extend the review period by no more than 30 days if they are of the opinion that more time is required to complete the review. They may extend the review period more than once.









(8) Il pourra toutefois prolonger le délai de révision d’au plus trente jours à chaque fois s’il estime qu’il ne pourra terminer la révision dans le délai prévu. Le délai peut être prolongé plus d’une fois.



Prolongation










Reasons for extension



(9) If the review period is extended, the person who made the request shall, without delay, be notified in writing of the reasons for extending it.









(9) La prolongation est communiquée sans délai par écrit au demandeur, motifs à l’appui.



Motifs écrits










Decision on completion of review



(10) On completion of a review, the review officer shall confirm, amend, terminate or cancel the order.









(10) Au terme de la révision, le réviseur confirme, modifie, révoque ou annule l’ordre.



Issue de la révision










Notice



(11) The person who made the request or, if there is no request, the person to whom the order was directed, shall, without delay, be notified in writing of the reasons for the review officer’s decision under subsection (10).









(11) Un avis écrit et motivé de la décision prise au titre du paragraphe (10) est communiqué sans délai au demandeur ou, à défaut de demande, au destinataire de l’ordre.



Avis écrit










Effect of amendment



(12) An order made under section 26.1 that is amended is subject to review under this section.









(12) L’ordre modifié par la décision est susceptible de révision conformément au présent article.



Effet de la modification










Certain information privileged



(13) All information that, under the Hazard-ous Materials Information Review Act, a supplier is exempt from disclosing under this Act and that is obtained by a review officer in the exercise of their powers or the performance of their duties or functions under this section is privileged and, notwithstanding the Access to Information Act or any other Act or law, shall not be disclosed to any other person except as may be necessary for the purposes of the administration and enforcement of this Act.









(13) Les renseignements pour lesquels le fournisseur est soustrait, en application de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, à l’obligation de communication applicable en vertu de la présente loi et qui sont obtenus par un réviseur dans l’exercice de ses attributions au titre du présent article sont protégés et ne peuvent, malgré la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou toute autre règle de droit, être communiqués à une autre personne, sauf dans la mesure nécessaire pour l’exécution et le contrôle d’application de la présente loi.



Protection de certains renseignements










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



124. Paragraph 27(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









124. L’alinéa 27a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1












(a) respecting the performance of an inspector’s, analyst’s or review officer’s duties or functions and the circumstances in which an inspector or a review officer may exercise their powers;






(a.1) respecting the taking of samples and the seizure, detention, forfeiture or disposition of anything under this Part;






(a.2) respecting the form of notices referred to in subsections 25(2) and 26.1(3) and the time within which and manner in which orders are to be provided under subsection 26.1(3);






(a.3) respecting the measures referred to in section 26.1;






(a.4) respecting the review of orders under section 26.3;






(a.5) prescribing anything that by this Part is to be prescribed; and









a) régir l’exercice des attributions des inspecteurs, analystes et réviseurs et les circonstances de l’exercice des pouvoirs des inspecteurs et des réviseurs;






a.1) régir la saisie, la rétention et la confiscation de toute chose — et la façon d’en disposer — ainsi que le prélèvement d’échantillons au titre de la présente partie;






a.2) régir la forme des avis prévus aux paragraphes 25(2) et 26.1(3) ainsi que les modalités et délais applicables à la communication de l’ordre au titre du paragraphe 26.1(3);






a.3) régir les mesures visées à l’article 26.1;






a.4) régir la révision des ordres prévue à l’article 26.3;






a.5) prendre toute mesure d’ordre réglementaire prévue par la présente partie;












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



125. Section 28 of the Act is replaced by the following:









125. L’article 28 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Offence



28. (1) Every person who contravenes a provision of this Act, a provision of the regulations or an order made under this Act is guilty of an offence and is liable








(a) on conviction on indictment, to a fine of not more than $5,000,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or to both; or








(b) on summary conviction, for a first offence, to a fine of not more than $250,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than six months or to both and, for a subsequent offence, to a fine of not more than $500,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than 18 months or to both.









28. (1) Toute personne qui contrevient à une disposition de la présente loi ou de ses règlements ou à un ordre donné sous le régime de celle-ci commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infraction




a) par mise en accusation, une amende maximale de 5 000 000 $ et un emprisonnement maximal de deux ans, ou l’une de ces peines;








b) par procédure sommaire, pour une première infraction, une amende maximale de 250 000 $ et un emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou l’une de ces peines, et, en cas de récidive, une amende maximale de 500 000 $ et un emprisonnement maximal de dix-huit mois, ou l’une de ces peines.














Defence of due diligence



(1.1) No person shall be found guilty of an offence under subsection (1) if they establish that they exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.









(1.1) Nul ne peut être déclaré coupable d’une infraction prévue au paragraphe (1) s’il prouve qu’il a pris les précautions voulues pour prévenir sa perpétration.



Disculpation : précautions voulues










Offence — fault



(1.2) Every person who knowingly or recklessly contravenes a provision of this Act, a provision of the regulations or an order made under this Act is guilty of an offence and is liable








(a) on conviction on indictment, to a fine in an amount that is at the discretion of the court or to imprisonment for a term of not more than five years or to both; or








(b) on summary conviction, for a first offence, to a fine of not more than $500,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than 18 months or to both and, for a subsequent offence, to a fine of not more than $1,000,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years or to both.









(1.2) Toute personne qui contrevient sciemment ou par insouciance à une disposition de la présente loi ou de ses règlements ou à un ordre donné sous le régime de celle-ci commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infraction —faute




a) par mise en accusation, une amende dont le montant est laissé à l’appréciation du tribunal et un emprisonnement maximal de cinq ans, ou l’une de ces peines;








b) par procédure sommaire, pour une première infraction, une amende maximale de 500 000 $ et un emprisonnement maximal de dix-huit mois, ou l’une de ces peines, et, en cas de récidive, une amende maximale de 1 000 000 $ et un emprisonnement maximal de deux ans, ou l’une de ces peines.














Parties to offence



(2) If a person other than an individual commits an offence under subsection (1) or (1.2), an officer, director, or agent or mandatary, of the person who directed, authorized, assented to, acquiesced in or participated in the commission of the offence is a party to and guilty of the offence and is liable on conviction to the punishment provided for the offence, whether or not the person has been prosecuted or convicted.









(2) En cas de perpétration d’une infraction prévue aux paragraphes (1) ou (1.2) par toute personne autre qu’un individu, ceux de ses dirigeants, administrateurs ou mandataires qui l’ont ordonnée ou autorisée, ou qui y ont consenti ou participé, sont considérés comme des coauteurs de l’infraction et encourent, sur déclaration de culpabilité, la peine prévue, que la personne ait été ou non poursuivie ou déclarée coupable.



Participants à l’infraction










Limitation period



(3) Proceedings by way of summary conviction in respect of an offence under paragraph (1)(b) or (1.2)(b) may be instituted at any time within two years after the day on which the subject matter of the proceedings arises.









(3) Les poursuites visant une infraction punissable sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire et prévue aux alinéas (1)b) ou (1.2)b) se prescrivent par deux ans à compter de la date de sa perpétration.



Prescription










Sentencing considerations



(4) A court that imposes a sentence shall take into account, in addition to any other principles that it is required to consider, the harm or risk of harm caused by the commission of the offence.









(4) Le tribunal détermine la peine à infliger compte tenu — en plus des principes qu’il doit prendre en considération — du dommage ou du risque de dommage que cause l’infraction.



Facteurs à considérer










Proof of offence



(5) In a prosecution for an offence under subsection (1) or (1.2), it is sufficient proof of the offence to establish that it was committed by an employee, or agent or mandatary, of the accused, even if the employee, or agent or mandatary, is not identified or prosecuted for the offence, unless the accused establishes that the offence was committed without the knowledge or consent of the accused and that the accused exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.









(5) Dans les poursuites pour une infraction prévue aux paragraphes (1) ou (1.2), il suffit, pour établir la culpabilité de l’accusé, de prouver que l’infraction a été commise par son employé ou mandataire, que celui-ci soit ou non identifié ou poursuivi. L’accusé peut se disculper en prouvant que la perpétration a eu lieu à son insu ou sans son consentement et qu’il avait pris les précautions voulues pour la prévenir.



Preuve










Continuing offence



28.1 If an offence under section 28 is committed or continued on more than one day, it constitutes a separate offence for each day on which it is committed or continued.









28.1 Il est compté une infraction distincte pour chacun des jours au cours desquels se commet ou se continue toute infraction prévue à l’article 28.



Infraction continue










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



126. Subsection 30(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









126. Le paragraphe 30(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Analyst’s certificate



30. (1) Subject to this section, a certificate of an analyst stating that the analyst has analysed or examined a product, mixture, material or substance and stating the result of the analysis or examination is admissible in evidence in any prosecution for an offence mentioned in subsection 29(1) and, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, is proof of the statements contained in the certificate without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed the certificate.









30. (1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions du présent article, le certificat d’un analyste, où il est déclaré que celui-ci a étudié tel produit, tel mélange, telle matière ou telle substance et où sont donnés ses résultats, est admissible en preuve dans les poursuites visant l’une des infractions visées au paragraphe 29(1) et, sauf preuve contraire, fait foi de son contenu sans qu’il soit nécessaire de prouver l’authenticité de la signature qui y est apposée ou la qualité officielle du signataire.



Certificat de l’analyste










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 1



127. Section 31 of the Act is replaced by the following:









127. L’article 31 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 1










Self-incrimination



30.1 The information and results contained in the documents that a person provides under an order made under section 20 may not be used or received to incriminate the person in any proceeding against them in respect of an offence under this Act.









30.1 Les renseignements et résultats contenus dans tout document qu’une personne communique en conformité avec un ordre donné en vertu de l’article 20 ne peuvent être utilisés ou admis pour l’incriminer dans le cadre de poursuites pour infraction à la présente loi intentées contre elle.



Auto-incrimination










Trial of offence



31. A complaint or information in respect of an offence under section 28 may be heard, tried or determined by a provincial court judge or a justice of the peace if the accused is resident within, is carrying on business within or happens to be within the territorial jurisdiction of the provincial court judge or justice of the peace, although the matter of the complaint or information did not arise in that territorial jurisdiction.









31. Le juge de la cour provinciale ou le juge de paix dans le ressort duquel l’accusé se trouve, réside ou exerce ses activités est compétent pour connaître de toute plainte ou dénonciation en matière d’infraction prévue à l’article 28, indépendamment du lieu de perpétration.



Tribunal compétent










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 2(2)



128. Schedule II to the Act is replaced by the Schedules 1 and 2 set out in Schedule 4 to this Act.









128. L’annexe II de la même loi est remplacée par les annexes 1 et 2 figurant à l’annexe 4 de la présente loi.



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), par. 2(2)










Transitional Provisions









Dispositions transitoires












Definitions



129. (1) The following definitions apply in this section and sections 130 to 138.




“controlled product”« produit contrôlé »



“controlled product” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the former Act.




“former Act”« ancienne loi »



“former Act” means the Hazardous Products Act as it read immediately before the day on which section 114 comes into force.









129. (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent article et aux articles 130 à 138.



Définitions




« ancienne loi » La Loi sur les produits dangereux dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114.



« ancienne loi »“former Act”




« produit contrôlé » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de l’ancienne loi.



« produit contrôlé »“controlled product”










Same meaning



(2) Unless a contrary intention appears, words and expressions used in sections 130 to 138 have the same meanings as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act.









(2) Sauf indication contraire, les termes des articles 130 à 138 s’entendent au sens de l’article 2 la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



Terminologie










Sale of controlled product



130. (1) Section 13 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a controlled product if the supplier sells the controlled product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 in respect of that sale.









130. (1) L’article 13 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit contrôlé dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente, en situation de contravention à l’article 13 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Vente d’un produit contrôlé










Importation of controlled product



(2) Section 14 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a controlled product if the supplier imports the controlled product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 14 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 14 in respect of that importation.









(2) L’article 14 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé dans le cas où, d’une part, il l’importe à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même importation, en situation de contravention à l’article 14 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Importation d’un produit contrôlé










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(3) Sections 13 and 14 of the Hazardous Products Act do not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale or importation of a hazardous product that is not a controlled product if the supplier sells or imports the hazardous product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(3) Les articles 13 et 14 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’appliquent pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente ou de l’importation d’un produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il le vend ou l’importe à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Resale of controlled product



131. (1) Section 13 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a controlled product that was sold to them if the supplier sells the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 130 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 in respect of that sale.









131. (1) L’article 13 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit contrôlé qui lui a été vendu dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 130 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente, en situation de contravention à l’article 13 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Revente d’un produit contrôlé










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(2) Section 13 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a hazardous product that was sold to them and that is not a controlled product if the supplier sells the hazardous product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 130 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(2) L’article 13 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit dangereux qui lui a été vendu et qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il le vend à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 130 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Importation of controlled product for own use in work place



132. (1) Section 14 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a controlled product that the supplier intends only to use in their work place if the supplier imports the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 130 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 14 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 14 in respect of that importation.









132. (1) L’article 14 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé qu’il prévoit utiliser seulement dans son lieu de travail dans le cas où, d’une part, il l’importe à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 130 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même importation, en situation de contravention à l’article 14 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Importation d’un produit contrôlé pour son propre usage dans son lieu de travail










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(2) Section 14 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a hazardous product that the supplier intends only to use in their work place and that is not a controlled product if the supplier imports the hazardous product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 130 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(2) L’article 14 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit dangereux qu’il prévoit utiliser seulement dans son lieu de travail et qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il l’importe à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 130 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Sale of controlled product



133. (1) Subsection 14.1(1) of the Hazard-ous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a controlled product that contains asbestos and that meets the requirements set out for hazardous products in regulations made under subsection 15(2) of the Hazardous Products Act if the supplier sells the controlled product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 in respect of that sale.









133. (1) Le paragraphe 14.1(1) de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit contrôlé contenant de l’amiante qui est conforme aux exigences applicables aux produits dangereux prévues par les règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2) de cette loi dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente, en situation de contravention à l’article 13 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Vente d’un produit contrôlé










Importation of controlled product



(2) Subsection 14.1(2) of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a controlled product that contains asbestos and that meets the requirements set out for hazardous products in regulations made under subsection 15(2) of the Hazardous Products Act if the supplier imports the controlled product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 14 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 14 in respect of that importation.









(2) Le paragraphe 14.1(2) de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé contenant de l’amiante qui est conforme aux exigences applicables aux produits dangereux prévues par les règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2) de cette loi dans le cas où, d’une part, il l’importe à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même importation, en situation de contravention à l’article 14 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Importation d’un produit contrôlé










Resale of controlled product



134. (1) Subsection 14.1(1) of the Hazard-ous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a controlled product that contains asbestos, that was sold to them and that meets the requirements set out for hazardous products in regulations made under subsection 15(2) of the Hazard-ous Products Act if the supplier sells the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 133 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 in respect of that sale.









134. (1) Le paragraphe 14.1(1) de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit contrôlé contenant de l’amiante qui lui a été vendu et qui est conforme aux exigences applicables aux produits dangereux prévues par les règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2) de cette loi dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 133 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente, en situation de contravention à l’article 13 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Revente d’un produit contrôlé










Importation of controlled product for own use in work place



(2) Subsection 14.1(2) of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a controlled product that contains asbestos, that the supplier intends only to use in their work place and that meets the requirements set out for hazardous products in regulations made under subsection 15(2) of the Hazardous Products Act if the supplier imports the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 133 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 14 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 14 in respect of that importation.









(2) Le paragraphe 14.1(2) de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé contenant de l’amiante qu’il prévoit utiliser seulement dans son lieu de travail et qui est conforme aux exigences applicables aux produits dangereux prévues par les règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(2) de cette loi dans le cas où, d’une part, il l’importe à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 133 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même importation, en situation de contravention à l’article 14 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Importation d’un produit contrôlé pour son propre usage dans son lieu de travail










Sale or importation of controlled product — false information



135. (1) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale or importation of a controlled product if the supplier sells or imports the controlled product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 or 14, as the case may be, of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 or 14 in respect of that sale or importation.









135. (1) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente ou de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend ou l’importe à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente ou importation, en situation de contravention aux articles 13 ou 14, selon le cas, de l’ancienne loi si ceux-ci étaient en vigueur à ce moment.



Vente ou importation d’un produit contrôlé — faux renseignements










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(2) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale or importation of a hazardous product that is not a controlled product if the supplier sells or imports the hazardous product on or after the day on which section 114 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(2) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente ou de l’importation d’un produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il le vend ou l’importe à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Resale of controlled product — false information



136. (1) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a controlled product that was sold to them if the supplier sells the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 135 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 13 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 13 in respect of that sale.









136. (1) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit contrôlé qui lui a été vendu dans le cas où, d’une part, il le vend à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 135 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même vente, en situation de contravention à l’article 13 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Revente d’un produit contrôlé — faux renseignements










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(2) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the sale of a hazardous product that was sold to them and that is not a controlled product if the supplier sells the hazardous product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 135 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(2) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de la vente d’un produit dangereux qui lui a été vendu et qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il le vend à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 135 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Importation of controlled product for own use in work place — false information



137. (1) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a controlled product that the supplier intends only to use in their work place if the supplier imports the controlled product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 135 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section and if the supplier would not, were section 14 of the former Act in force at the time, be in contravention of that section 14 in respect of that importation.









137. (1) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit contrôlé qu’il prévoit utiliser seulement dans son lieu de travail dans le cas où, d’une part, il l’importe à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 135 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article et où, d’autre part, il ne serait pas placé, du fait de cette même importation, en situation de contravention à l’article 14 de l’ancienne loi si celui-ci était en vigueur à ce moment.



Importation d’un produit contrôlé pour son propre usage dans son lieu de travail — faux renseignements










Hazardous product that is not controlled product



(2) Section 14.2 of the Hazardous Products Act does not apply to a supplier in respect of the importation of a hazardous product that the supplier intends only to use in their work place and that is not a controlled product if the supplier imports the hazardous product on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 135 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section.









(2) L’article 14.2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ne s’applique pas au fournisseur à l’égard de l’importation d’un produit dangereux qu’il prévoit utiliser seulement dans son lieu de travail et qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé s’il l’importe à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 135 ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article.



Produit dangereux qui n’est pas un produit contrôlé










Reference to regulations



138. For the purposes of sections 130 to 137, any references in the former Act to the Ingredient Disclosure List, to regulations, or to anything prescribed by regulation, are considered to be references to that List or those regulations as they read immediately before the day on which section 114 comes into force.









138. Pour l’application des articles 130 à 137, toute mention de la liste de divulgation des ingrédients ou des règlements dans l’ancienne loi vaut mention de la liste de divulgation des ingrédients établie en vertu de l’ancienne loi ou des règlements pris en vertu de l’ancienne loi, respectivement, dans leur version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114.



Mentions des règlements








R.S., c. L-2



Amendments to the Canada Labour Code









Modification du Code canadien du travail



L.R., ch. L-2










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 3(1); 2000, c. 20, s. 2(6)(F)



139. (1) The definition “hazardous substance” in subsection 122(1) of the Canada Labour Code is replaced by the following:









139. (1) La définition de « substance dangereuse », au paragraphe 122(1) du Code canadien du travail, est remplacée par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), par. 3(1)(A); 2000, ch. 20, par. 2(6)(F)










“hazardous substance”« substance dangereuse »



“hazardous substance” includes a hazardous product and a chemical, biological or physical agent that, by reason of a property that the agent possesses, is hazardous to the safety or health of a person exposed to it;









« substance dangereuse » Sont assimilés à des substances dangereuses les agents chimiques, biologiques ou physiques dont une propriété présente un risque pour la santé ou la sécurité de quiconque y est exposé, ainsi que les produits dangereux.



« substance dangereuse »“hazardous substance”










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 3(2)



(2) Subsection 122(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 122(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), par. 3(2)










Definitions



(2) In this Part, “hazardous product”, “label” and “safety data sheet” have the same meanings as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act.









(2) Dans la présente partie, « étiquette », « fiche de données de sécurité » et « produit dangereux » s’entendent au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



Définitions










R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), s. 5; 2000, c. 20, ss. 6(2)(F) and (3)



140. Paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of the Act are replaced by the following:









140. Les alinéas 125.1c) à e) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), art. 5; 2000, ch. 20, par. 6(2)(F) et (3)












(c) ensure that all hazardous substances in the work place, other than hazardous prod-ucts, are identified in the manner prescribed;






(d) subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, ensure that each hazardous product in the work place or each container in the work place in which a hazardous product is contained has affixed to it, printed on it, attached to it or otherwise applied to it a label that meets the prescribed requirements;






(e) subject to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act, make available to every employee, in the prescribed manner, a safety data sheet for each hazardous product to which the employee may be exposed that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1) of the Hazardous Products Act;









c) de veiller à ce que les substances dangereuses, à l’exclusion des produits dangereux, se trouvant dans le lieu de travail soient identifiées conformément aux règlements;






d) sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, de veiller à ce qu’une étiquette conforme aux exigences prévues par règlement soit apposée, imprimée, écrite, fixée ou autrement appliquée sur chaque produit dangereux se trouvant dans un lieu de travail ou sur le contenant qui le renferme;






e) sous réserve de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, de mettre à la disposition de chacun de ses employés, conformément aux règlements, une fiche de données de sécurité qui est conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) de la Loi sur les produits dangereux pour chaque produit dangereux auquel l’employé peut être exposé;












2000, c. 20, s. 7



141. Subsection 125.2(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









141. Le paragraphe 125.2(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2000, ch. 20, art. 7










Employer to provide information in emergency



125.2 (1) An employer shall, in respect of every work place controlled by the employer and, in respect of every work activity carried out by an employee in a work place that is not controlled by the employer, to the extent that the employer controls that activity, provide, in respect of any hazardous product to which an employee may be exposed, as soon as is practicable in the circumstances, any information that is included in the safety data sheet that is in the employer’s possession for the hazard- ous product to any physician or other prescribed medical professional who requests that information for the purpose of making a medical diagnosis of, or rendering medical treatment to, an employee in an emergency.









125.2 (1) L’employeur est tenu, en ce qui concerne tout lieu de travail placé sous son entière autorité, ainsi que toute tâche accomplie par un employé dans un lieu de travail ne relevant pas de son autorité, dans la mesure où cette tâche, elle, en relève, de fournir, relativement à tout produit dangereux auquel l’employé peut être exposé, aussitôt que possible dans les circonstances, les renseignements figurant sur la fiche de données de sécurité en sa possession concernant ce produit au médecin, ou à tout autre professionnel de la santé désigné par règlement, qui lui en fait la demande afin de poser un diagnostic médical à l’égard d’un employé qui se trouve dans une situation d’urgence, ou afin de traiter celui-ci.



Obligation de fournir des renseignements










2000, c. 20, s. 14



142. Subsection 144(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









142. Le paragraphe 144(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2000, ch. 20, art. 14










Privileged information



(4) All information that, under the Hazard-ous Materials Information Review Act, an employer is exempt from disclosing under this Act or the Hazardous Products Act and that is obtained in a work place, by an appeals officer or a health and safety officer who is admitted to the work place, under section 141, or by a person accompanying that officer, is privileged and, notwithstanding the Access to Information Act or any other Act or law, shall not be disclosed to any other person except for the purposes of this Part.









(4) Les renseignements pour lesquels un employeur est soustrait, en application de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, à l’obligation de communication prévue dans la présente loi ou la Loi sur les produits dangereux et qui sont obtenus sous le régime de l’article 141 par l’agent d’appel ou l’agent de santé et de sécurité, ou la personne qui l’accompagne, dans un lieu de travail sont protégés et ne peuvent, malgré la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou toute autre règle de droit, être communiqués à qui que ce soit, sauf pour l’application de la présente partie.



Renseignements confidentiels










Transitional Provisions









Dispositions transitoires












Paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of Canada Labour Code



143. Paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of the Canada Labour Code do not apply to an employer, on or after the day on which section 140 comes into force but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section, if the employer complies with the requirements set out in those paragraphs as they read immediately before the day on which section 140 comes into force, as if those paragraphs were still in force.









143. Les alinéas 125.1c) à e) du Code canadien du travail ne s’appliquent pas à l’employeur qui, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140, ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article, respecte les exigences prévues à ces alinéas dans leur version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140 comme si ceux-ci étaient toujours en vigueur.



Alinéas 125.1c) à e) du Code canadien du travail










Products in work place



144. Paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of the Canada Labour Code do not apply to an employer, on or after the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 143 but before a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section, in respect of hazardous products that are in the work place on the day fixed by order of the Governor in Council for the purposes of section 143, if the employer complies with the requirements set out in those paragraphs as they read immediately before the day on which section 140 comes into force, as if those paragraphs were still in force.









144. À la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 143, ou par la suite, mais avant la date fixée par décret pour l’application du présent article, les alinéas 125.1c) à e) du Code canadien du travail ne s’appliquent pas à l’employeur — en ce qui a trait aux produits dangereux se trouvant dans le lieu de travail à la date fixée par décret pour l’application de l’article 143 — s’il respecte les exigences prévues à ces alinéas dans leur version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140 comme si ceux-ci étaient toujours en vigueur.



Produits dans le lieu de travail










Same meaning



145. (1) Unless a contrary intention appears, words and expressions used in sections 143 and 144 have the same meanings as in section 122 of the Canada Labour Code.









145. (1) Sauf indication contraire, les termes des articles 143 et 144 s’entendent au sens de l’article 122 du Code canadien du travail.



Terminologie










References



(2) For the purposes of sections 143 and 144,








(a) “controlled product”, “hazard symbol”, “Ingredient Disclosure List”, “label” and “material safety data sheet” in paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of the Canada Labour Code, as that Act read immediately before the day on which section 140 comes into force, have the same meanings as in the Hazardous Products Act, as that Act read immediately before the day on which section 114 comes into force;








(b) any references to the Ingredient Disclosure List in paragraph 125.1(e) of the Canada Labour Code, as that Act read immediately before the day on which section 140 comes into force, are considered to be references to the Ingredient Disclosure List as it read immediately before the day on which section 114 comes into force; and








(c) any references to regulations, or to anything prescribed by regulation, in paragraphs 125.1(c) to (e) of the Canada Labour Code, as that Act read immediately before the day on which section 140 comes into force, are considered to be references to those regulations as they read immediately before that day.









(2) Pour l’application des articles 143 et 144 :



Mentions




a) les termes « étiquette », « fiche signalétique », « liste de divulgation des ingrédients », « produit contrôlé » et « signal de danger » aux alinéas 125.1c) à e) du Code canadien du travail dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140 s’entendent au sens de la Loi sur les produits dangereux dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114;








b) toute mention de la liste de divulgation des ingrédients à l’alinéa 125.1e) du Code canadien du travail dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140 vaut mention de la liste de divulgation des ingrédients dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 114;








c) toute mention de règlements, de renseignements réglementaires ou de signaux de danger réglementaires aux alinéas 125.1c) à e) du Code canadien du travail dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140 vaut mention de règlements, de renseignements réglementaires ou de signaux de danger réglementaires dans leur version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 140.












R.S., c. 24 (3rd Supp.), Part III



Amendments to the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act









Modification de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses



L.R., ch. 24 (3e suppl.), partie III












146. (1) The definitions “controlled prod- uct” and “material safety data sheet” in subsection 10(1) of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act are repealed.









146. (1) Les définitions de « fiche signalétique » et « produit contrôlé », au paragraphe 10(1) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, sont abrogées.














(2) Subsection 10(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(2) Le paragraphe 10(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :












“CAS registry number”« numéro d’enregistrement CAS »



“CAS registry number” means the identification number assigned to a chemical by the Chemical Abstracts Service, a division of the American Chemical Society;




“chemical name”« dénomination chimique »



“chemical name” means a scientific designation of a material or substance that is made in accordance with the rules of nomenclature of either the Chemical Abstracts Service, a division of the American Chemical Society, or the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, or a scientific designation of a material or substance that is internationally recognized and that clearly identifies the material or substance;




“hazardous product”« produit dangereux »



“hazardous product” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act;




“label”« étiquette »



“label” means a document that contains a label, as defined in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act, that meets the requirements set out in the regulations made under subsection 15(1) of that Act;




“mixture”« mélange »



“mixture” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act;




“safety data sheet”« fiche de données de sécurité »



“safety data sheet” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act;




“substance”« substance »



“substance” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Hazardous Products Act;









« dénomination chimique » Appellation scientifique d’une matière ou d’une substance conforme aux systèmes de nomenclature du Chemical Abstracts Service, division de l’American Chemical Society, ou de l’Union internationale de chimie pure et appliquée, ou autre appellation scientifique reconnue à l’échelle internationale qui identifie clairement la matière ou la substance.



« dénomination chimique »“chemical name”




« étiquette » S’entend d’un document qui contient une étiquette, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, qui est conforme aux exigences des règlements pris en vertu du paragraphe 15(1) de cette loi.



« étiquette »“label”




« fiche de données de sécurité » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



« fiche de données de sécurité »“safety data sheet”




« mélange » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



« mélange »“mixture”




« numéro d’enregistrement CAS » Numéro d’identification attribué à un produit chimique par le Chemical Abstracts Service, division de l’American Chemical Society.



« numéro d’enregistrement CAS »“CAS registry number”




« produit dangereux » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



« produit dangereux »“hazardous product”




« substance » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les produits dangereux.



« substance »“substance”










1992, c. 1, s. 144(1) (Sch. VII, item 27(F)); 2012, c. 31, par. 284(a)(F)



147. (1) Subsections 11(1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:









147. (1) Les paragraphes 11(1) et (2) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1992, ch. 1, par. 144(1), ann. VII, art. 27(F); 2012, ch. 31, al. 284a)(F)










Claim for exemption by supplier



11. (1) Any supplier who is required, either directly or indirectly, because of the provisions of the Hazardous Products Act, to disclose any of the following information may, if the supplier considers it to be confidential business information, claim an exemption from the requirement to disclose that information by filing with the Chief Screening Officer a claim for exemption in accordance with this section:








(a) in the case of a material or substance that is a hazardous product,








(i) the chemical name of the material or substance,








(ii) the CAS registry number, or any other unique identifier, of the material or substance, and








(iii) the chemical name of any impurity, stabilizing solvent or stabilizing additive that is present in the material or substance, that is classified in a category or subcategory of a health hazard class under the Hazardous Products Act and that contrib-utes to the classification of the material or substance in the health hazard class under that Act;








(b) in the case of an ingredient that is in a mixture that is a hazardous product,








(i) the chemical name of the ingredient,








(ii) the CAS registry number, or any other unique identifier, of the ingredient, and








(iii) the concentration or concentration range of the ingredient; and








(c) in the case of a material, substance or mixture that is a hazardous product, the name of any toxicological study that identifies the material or substance or any ingredient in the mixture.









11. (1) Le fournisseur qui est tenu, directement ou indirectement, par l’effet des dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, de communiquer les renseignements énumérés ci-après peut, s’il estime que ces renseignements sont confidentiels, présenter à l’agent de contrôle en chef, conformément au présent article, une demande de dérogation à l’obligation de communiquer :



Demande de dérogation —fournisseur




a) s’agissant d’une matière ou substance qui est un produit dangereux :








(i) sa dénomination chimique,








(ii) son numéro d’enregistrement CAS ou tout autre identificateur unique,








(iii) la dénomination chimique de toute impureté, de tout solvant de stabilisation ou de tout additif de stabilisation se trouvant dans la matière ou la substance qui est classé dans une catégorie ou une sous-catégorie d’une classe de danger pour la santé, en application de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, et qui contribue à la classification de la matière ou de la substance dans la classe de danger pour la santé, en application de cette loi;








b) s’agissant d’un ingrédient d’un mélange qui est un produit dangereux :








(i) sa dénomination chimique,








(ii) son numéro d’enregistrement CAS ou tout autre identificateur unique,








(iii) sa concentration ou sa plage de concentration;








c) s’agissant d’une matière, d’une substance ou d’un mélange qui est un produit dangereux, le titre d’une étude toxicologique qui identifie la matière, la substance ou un ingrédient du mélange.














Claim for exemption by employer



(2) Any employer who is required, either directly or indirectly, because of the provisions of the Canada Labour Code, to disclose any of the following information may, if the employer considers it to be confidential business information, claim an exemption from the requirement to disclose that information by filing with the Chief Screening Officer a claim for exemption in accordance with this section:








(a) in the case of a material or substance that is a hazardous product,








(i) the chemical name of the material or substance,








(ii) the CAS registry number, or any other unique identifier, of the material or substance, and








(iii) the chemical name of any impurity, stabilizing solvent or stabilizing additive that is present in the material or substance, that is classified in a category or subcategory of a health hazard class under the Hazardous Products Act and that contrib-utes to the classification of the material or substance in the health hazard class under that Act;








(b) in the case of an ingredient that is in a mixture that is a hazardous product,








(i) the chemical name of the ingredient,








(ii) the CAS registry number, or any other unique identifier, of the ingredient, and








(iii) the concentration or concentration range of the ingredient;








(c) in the case of a material, substance or mixture that is a hazardous product, the name of any toxicological study that identifies the material or substance or any ingredient in the mixture;








(d) the product identifier of a hazardous product, being its chemical name, common name, generic name, trade-name or brand name;








(e) information about a hazardous product, other than the product identifier, that constitutes a means of identification; and








(f) information that could be used to identify a supplier of a hazardous product.









(2) L’employeur qui est tenu, directement ou indirectement, par l’effet des dispositions du Code canadien du travail, de communiquer l’un ou l’autre des renseignements énumérés ci-après peut, s’il estime que ces renseignements sont confidentiels, présenter à l’agent de contrôle en chef, conformément au présent article, une demande de dérogation à l’obligation de communiquer :



Demande de dérogation— employeur




a) s’agissant d’une matière ou substance qui est un produit dangereux :








(i) sa dénomination chimique,








(ii) son numéro d’enregistrement CAS ou tout autre identificateur unique,








(iii) la dénomination chimique de toute impureté, de tout solvant de stabilisation ou de tout additif de stabilisation se trouvant dans la matière ou la substance qui est classé dans une catégorie ou une sous-catégorie d’une classe de danger pour la santé, en application de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, et qui contribue à la classification de la matière ou de la substance dans la classe de danger pour la santé, en application de cette loi;








b) s’agissant d’un ingrédient d’un mélange qui est un produit dangereux :








(i) sa dénomination chimique,








(ii) son numéro d’enregistrement CAS ou tout autre identificateur unique,








(iii) sa concentration ou sa plage de concentration;








c) s’agissant d’une matière, d’une substance ou d’un mélange qui est un produit dangereux, le titre d’une étude toxicologique qui identifie la matière, la substance ou un ingrédient du mélange;








d) l’identificateur du produit dangereux, à savoir sa marque, sa dénomination chimique ou son appellation courante, commerciale ou générique;








e) les renseignements sur le produit dangereux, autres que son identificateur, qui constituent des moyens d’identification;








f) les renseignements qui pourraient servir à identifier le fournisseur d’un produit dangereux.














2007, c. 7, s. 1



(2) The portion of subsection 11(4) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 11(4) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 7, art. 1










Contents of claim



(4) A claim for exemption shall be accompanied by the safety data sheet or label to which the claim relates and shall contain









(4) La demande de dérogation est accompagnée de la fiche de données de sécurité ou de l’étiquette en cause et contient :



Contenu de la demande










2012, c. 31, par. 284(b)(F)



148. (1) The portion of subsection 12(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









148. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 12(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 31, al. 284b)(F)










Duties of Chief Screening Officer



12. (1) The Chief Screening Officer shall, on receipt of a claim for exemption and the safety data sheet or label to which it relates and of payment of the required fee,









12. (1) Sur réception d’une demande de dérogation et de la fiche de données de sécurité ou de l’étiquette en cause ainsi que du paiement du droit exigible, l’agent de contrôle en chef :



Fonctions du directeur de la Section de contrôle












(2) Paragraph 12(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 12(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) assign a screening officer to review the claim and the safety data sheet or label to which it relates.









b) charge un agent de contrôle d’étudier la demande et la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en cause.












2001, c. 34, s. 50(F)



(3) Subsection 12(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Le paragraphe 12(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 34, art. 50(F)










Notice



(2) The notice referred to in paragraph (1)(a) shall contain a statement offering every affected party the opportunity to make, within the period specified in the notice, written representations to the screening officer with respect to the claim for exemption and the safety data sheet or label to which it relates.









(2) L’avis visé à l’alinéa (1)a) contient une offre faite à toute partie touchée de présenter auprès de l’agent de contrôle des observations par écrit sur la demande de dérogation et la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en cause dans le délai qui est spécifié dans l’avis.



Avis












(4) Subsection 12(3) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 12(3) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Limitation



(3) L’avis visé à l’alinéa (1)a) ne peut fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande.









(3) L’avis visé à l’alinéa (1)a) ne peut fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande.



Limitation












149. (1) The portion of subsection 13(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









149. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 13(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Duties of screening officer



13. (1) A screening officer shall review a claim for exemption and the safety data sheet or label to which it relates in accordance with the prescribed procedures and shall









13. (1) L’agent de contrôle étudie la demande de dérogation et la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en cause conformément aux modalités réglementaires et :



Fonctions de l’agent de contrôle












(2) Paragraph 13(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 13(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) decide whether the safety data sheet or label to which the claim relates, except to the extent that it does not disclose the information in respect of which the claim is made, complies with the provisions of the Hazardous Products Act or the provisions of the Canada Labour Code, as the case may be.









b) décide si la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette visée par la demande est conforme, sauf dans la mesure où elle ne fournit pas de renseignements visés par la demande, aux exigences des dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ou du Code canadien du travail, selon le cas.














150. Subsection 14(2) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









150. Le paragraphe 14(2) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Obligation du demandeur



(2) Le destinataire de l’avis visé au paragraphe (1) communique à l’agent de contrôle, selon les modalités de forme et de temps qui y sont indiquées, les renseignements, exigés par l’avis, qu’il a à sa disposition.









(2) Le destinataire de l’avis visé au paragraphe (1) communique à l’agent de contrôle, selon les modalités de forme et de temps qui y sont indiquées, les renseignements, exigés par l’avis, qu’il a à sa disposition.



Obligation du demandeur












151. (1) The portion of subsection 15(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









151. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 15(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Decision in writing



15. (1) A screening officer shall, as soon as is practicable, render a decision in writing on a claim for exemption and the safety data sheet or label to which it relates, including reasons for the decision, and shall









15. (1) L’agent de contrôle rend, aussitôt que possible, une décision motivée par écrit sur la demande de dérogation et la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en cause et :



Décision par écrit












(2) Paragraph 15(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 15(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) cause a notice of the decision to be given to each affected party who made written representations to the screening officer with respect to the claim for exemption or the safety data sheet or label to which it relates.









b) fait donner un avis de la décision à chaque partie touchée qui a présenté à l’agent des observations par écrit concernant la demande et la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en cause.














(3) Subsection 15(2) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Le paragraphe 15(2) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Notification de la décision



(2) L’avis prévu à l’alinéa (1)b) doit contenir les renseignements nécessaires pour indiquer le sens de la décision de l’agent de contrôle et la motivation de celle-ci, sans toutefois fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande.









(2) L’avis prévu à l’alinéa (1)b) doit contenir les renseignements nécessaires pour indiquer le sens de la décision de l’agent de contrôle et la motivation de celle-ci, sans toutefois fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande.



Notification de la décision










2007, c. 7, s. 3



152. Subsections 16.1(1) to (3) of the Act are replaced by the following:









152. Les paragraphes 16.1(1) à (3) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 7, art. 3










Undertaking



16.1 (1) If a screening officer determines under paragraph 13(1)(b) that a safety data sheet or label to which a claim for exemption relates does not comply with the provisions of the Hazardous Products Act or the provisions of the Canada Labour Code, as the case may be, the screening officer may send an undertaking to the claimant setting out the measures that are required to be taken for the purpose of ensuring compliance with those provisions, except to the extent that they would require the claimant to disclose the information in respect of which the claim is made, in the manner and within the period specified in the undertaking.









16.1 (1) S’il juge, en vertu de l’alinéa 13(1)b), que la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette visée par la demande de dérogation n’est pas conforme aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ou du Code canadien du travail, selon le cas, l’agent de contrôle peut faire parvenir au demandeur un engagement énonçant les mesures à prendre pour veiller au respect de ces dispositions — sauf dans la mesure où celles-ci obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande — selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’engagement.



Engagement










Agreement by claimant



(2) If the claimant agrees with the measures set out in the undertaking, the claimant shall sign the undertaking and return it to the screening officer together with the amended safety data sheet or label.









(2) Si le demandeur est d’accord avec les mesures proposées, il signe l’engagement et le renvoie à l’agent de contrôle avec la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette modifiée.



Accord du demandeur










Notice



(3) On receipt of the signed undertaking, if the screening officer is satisfied, after reviewing the safety data sheet or label, that the claimant has taken the measures set out in the undertaking in the manner and within the period specified in it, the screening officer shall send a notice to the claimant confirming their compliance with the undertaking.









(3) Sur réception de l’engagement signé par le demandeur et s’il est convaincu, après avoir étudié la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette, que celui-ci a respecté l’engagement, l’agent de contrôle fait parvenir au demandeur un avis confirmant l’exécution de l’engagement.



Avis










2007, c. 7, s. 4



153. Subsection 17(1) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









153. Le paragraphe 17(1) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 7, art. 4










Ordre



17. (1) S’il ne reçoit pas l’engagement signé ou n’est pas convaincu que le demandeur l’a respecté, l’agent de contrôle lui ordonne de se conformer aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ou du Code canadien du travail, selon le cas, sauf dans la mesure où elles obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande, selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’ordre.









17. (1) S’il ne reçoit pas l’engagement signé ou n’est pas convaincu que le demandeur l’a respecté, l’agent de contrôle lui ordonne de se conformer aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux ou du Code canadien du travail, selon le cas, sauf dans la mesure où elles obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande, selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’ordre.



Ordre










2007, c. 7, s. 5



154. (1) Subparagraph 18(1)(a)(ii) of the Act is replaced by the following:









154. (1) Le sous-alinéa 18(1)a)(ii) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 7, art. 5












(ii) a notice containing any information that, in the opinion of a screening officer, should have been disclosed on any safety data sheet or label reviewed by the screening officer; and









(ii) un avis contenant les renseignements qui, de l’avis de l’agent de contrôle, auraient dû être communiqués sur la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette qui lui a été soumise;












2007, c. 7, s. 5



(2) Subparagraph 18(1)(b)(ii) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le sous-alinéa 18(1)b)(ii) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 7, art. 5












(ii) a notice containing any information that has been disclosed on any safety data sheet or label in compliance with the undertaking.









(ii) un avis contenant les renseignements qui ont été communiqués sur la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette en exécution de l’engagement.














(3) Subsection 18(3) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Le paragraphe 18(3) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Limitation



(3) L’avis prévu au paragraphe (1) ne peut contenir de renseignements faisant l’objet d’une demande de dérogation.









(3) L’avis prévu au paragraphe (1) ne peut contenir de renseignements faisant l’objet d’une demande de dérogation.



Limitation












155. Subsection 24(2) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









155. Le paragraphe 24(2) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Notification de la décision



(2) L’avis visé à l’alinéa (1)b) doit contenir les renseignements nécessaires pour indiquer le sens de la décision de la commission d’appel et la motivation de celle-ci, sans toutefois fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande de dérogation.









(2) L’avis visé à l’alinéa (1)b) doit contenir les renseignements nécessaires pour indiquer le sens de la décision de la commission d’appel et la motivation de celle-ci, sans toutefois fournir de renseignements faisant l’objet de la demande de dérogation.



Notification de la décision












156. Section 26 of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









156. L’article 26 de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Ordre de communication



26. (1) La commission d’appel peut ordonner au demandeur de communiquer à une partie touchée, ou à telle partie comprise dans une catégorie de parties touchées désignée par l’ordre, des renseignements qui font l’objet d’un appel d’une décision portant sur une demande de dérogation, si elle estime que, pour des raisons de santé et de sécurité, ces renseignements devraient être communiqués.









26. (1) La commission d’appel peut ordonner au demandeur de communiquer à une partie touchée, ou à telle partie comprise dans une catégorie de parties touchées désignée par l’ordre, des renseignements qui font l’objet d’un appel d’une décision portant sur une demande de dérogation, si elle estime que, pour des raisons de santé et de sécurité, ces renseignements devraient être communiqués.



Ordre de communication










Observation de l’ordre



(2) Le demandeur visé par un ordre de communication s’y conforme selon les modalités de forme et de temps qui y sont spécifiées.









(2) Le demandeur visé par un ordre de communication s’y conforme selon les modalités de forme et de temps qui y sont spécifiées.



Observation de l’ordre










Renseignements protégés



(3) Il est interdit à la partie touchée à qui des renseignements sont communiqués en application du paragraphe (1) de les communiquer à une autre personne ou de permettre à une autre personne d’y avoir accès.









(3) Il est interdit à la partie touchée à qui des renseignements sont communiqués en application du paragraphe (1) de les communiquer à une autre personne ou de permettre à une autre personne d’y avoir accès.



Renseignements protégés












157. (1) Paragraph 27(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









157. (1) L’alinéa 27(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) a notice containing any information that, in the opinion of an appeal board, should have been disclosed on any safety data sheet or label that was the subject matter of an appeal to the appeal board.









b) un avis contenant les renseignements qui, de l’avis de la commission d’appel, auraient dû être communiqués sur une fiche de données de sécurité ou une étiquette qui faisait l’objet d’un appel.














(2) Subsection 27(3) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 27(3) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Limitation



(3) L’avis prévu au paragraphe (1) ne peut contenir de renseignements faisant l’objet d’une demande de dérogation.









(3) L’avis prévu au paragraphe (1) ne peut contenir de renseignements faisant l’objet d’une demande de dérogation.



Limitation










2012, c. 31, s. 278(3)



158. Subsections 46(3) and (4) of the French version of the Act are replaced by the following:









158. Les paragraphes 46(3) et (4) de la version française de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 31, par. 278(3)










Autres exceptions



(3) Quiconque a obtenu des renseignements d’un fournisseur ou d’un employeur pour l’application de la présente loi peut les communiquer ou les faire communiquer à un médecin, ou à tout autre professionnel de la santé désigné par règlement, qui en fait la demande afin de poser un diagnostic médical à l’égard d’une personne qui se trouve en situation d’urgence ou afin de traiter celle-ci.









(3) Quiconque a obtenu des renseignements d’un fournisseur ou d’un employeur pour l’application de la présente loi peut les communiquer ou les faire communiquer à un médecin, ou à tout autre professionnel de la santé désigné par règlement, qui en fait la demande afin de poser un diagnostic médical à l’égard d’une personne qui se trouve en situation d’urgence ou afin de traiter celle-ci.



Autres exceptions










Conditions



(4) Il est interdit à quiconque obtient des renseignements en application des paragraphes (2) ou (3) de les communiquer sciemment à quiconque ou de permettre sciemment à quiconque d’y avoir accès, sauf dans la mesure nécessaire aux fins visées à ce paragraphe.









(4) Il est interdit à quiconque obtient des renseignements en application des paragraphes (2) ou (3) de les communiquer sciemment à quiconque ou de permettre sciemment à quiconque d’y avoir accès, sauf dans la mesure nécessaire aux fins visées à ce paragraphe.



Conditions










Transitional Provisions









Dispositions transitoires












Subsection 19(1) of Hazardous Materials Information Review Act



159. (1) For greater certainty, if a person who filed a claim for exemption under section 11 of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act is, on the day on which section 147 comes into force, exempt under subsection 19(1) of that Act from a requirement in respect of which the exemption is claimed, the person continues to be so exempt after that day until the final disposition of the proceedings in relation to that claim.









159. (1) Il est entendu que si, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 147, l’auteur de la demande prévue à l’article 11 de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est soustrait, en vertu du paragraphe 19(1) de cette loi, aux exigences visées par cette demande, il demeure soustrait à ces exigences pendant l’instance visée à ce paragraphe.



Paragraphe 19(1) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses










Subsection 19(2) of Hazardous Materials Information Review Act



(2) For greater certainty, if a person who filed a claim for exemption under section 11 of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act is, on the day on which section 147 comes into force, exempt under subsection 19(2) of that Act from a requirement in respect of which the claim or portion of a claim is determined to be valid, the person continues to be so exempt after that day for the remainder of the period referred to in that subsection 19(2).









(2) Il est entendu que si, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 147, l’auteur de la demande prévue à l’article 11 de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est soustrait, en vertu du paragraphe 19(2) de cette loi, aux exigences visées par cette demande, il demeure soustrait à ces exigences pendant le reste de la période prévue à ce paragraphe.



Paragraphe 19(2) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses










Coordinating Amendments









Dispositions de coordination












2013, c. 40



160. On the first day on which both subsection 194(2) of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 and section 142 of this Act are in force, subsection 144(4) of the Canada Labour Code is replaced by the following:









160. Dès le premier jour où le paragraphe 194(2) de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 et l’article 142 de la présente loi sont tous deux en vigueur, le paragraphe 144(4) du Code canadien du travail est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2013, ch. 40










Privileged information



(4) All information that, under the Hazard-ous Materials Information Review Act, an employer is exempt from disclosing under this Act or the Hazardous Products Act and that is obtained in a work place under section 141 is privileged and, notwithstanding the Access to Information Act or any other Act or law, shall not be disclosed to any other person except for the purposes of this Part.









(4) Les renseignements pour lesquels un employeur est soustrait, en application de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses, à l’obligation de communication prévue dans la présente loi ou la Loi sur les produits dangereux et qui sont obtenus sous le régime de l’article 141 dans un lieu de travail sont protégés et ne peuvent, malgré la Loi sur l’accès à l’information ou toute autre règle de droit, être communiqués à qui que ce soit, sauf pour l’application de la présente partie.



Renseignements confidentiels










Bill C-5



161. (1) Subsections (2) to (5) apply if Bill C-5, introduced in the 2nd session of the 41st Parliament and entitled the Offshore Health and Safety Act (in this section referred to as the “other Act”) receives royal assent.









161. (1) Les paragraphes (2) à (5) s’appliquent en cas de sanction du projet de loi C-5, déposé au cours de la 2e session de la 41e législature et intitulé Loi sur la santé et la sécurité dans la zone extracôtière (appelé « autre loi » au présent article).



Projet de loi C-5












(2) On the first day on which both section 106 of the other Act and section 147 of this Act are in force, the portion of subsection 11(2) of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Dès le premier jour où l’article 106 de l’autre loi et l’article 147 de la présente loi sont tous deux en vigueur, le passage du paragraphe 11(2) précédant l’alinéa a) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Claim for exemption by employer



(2) Any employer who is required, either directly or indirectly, because of the provisions of the Canada Labour Code or the provisions of the Accord Act, as the case may be, to disclose any of the following information may, if the employer considers it to be confidential business information, claim an exemption from the requirement to disclose it by filing with the Chief Screening Officer a claim for exemption in accordance with this section:









(2) L’employeur qui est tenu, directement ou indirectement, par l’effet des dispositions du Code canadien du travail ou de la loi de mise en oeuvre, selon le cas, de communiquer l’un ou l’autre des renseignements énumérés ci-après peut, s’il estime que ces renseignements sont confidentiels, présenter à l’agent de contrôle en chef, conformément au présent article, une demande de dérogation à l’obligation de communiquer :



Demande de dérogation— employeur












(3) On the first day on which both section 107 of the other Act and subsection 149(2) of this Act are in force, paragraph 13(1)(b) of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Dès le premier jour où l’article 107 de l’autre loi et le paragraphe 149(2) de la présente loi sont tous deux en vigueur, l’alinéa 13(1)b) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) decide whether the safety data sheet or label to which the claim relates, except to the extent that it does not disclose the information in respect of which the claim is made, complies with the provisions of the Hazard-ous Products Act, the provisions of the Canada Labour Code or the provisions of the Accord Act, as the case may be.









b) décide si la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette visée par la demande est conforme, sauf dans la mesure où elle ne fournit pas de renseignements visés par la demande, aux exigences des dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, du Code canadien du travail ou de la loi de mise en oeuvre, selon le cas.














(4) On the first day on which both subsection 109(1) of the other Act and section 152 of this Act are in force, subsection 16.1(1) of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Dès le premier jour où le paragraphe 109(1) de l’autre loi et l’article 152 de la présente loi sont tous deux en vigueur, le paragraphe 16.1(1) de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Undertaking



16.1 (1) If a screening officer determines under paragraph 13(1)(b) that a safety data sheet or label to which a claim for exemption relates does not comply with the provisions of the Hazardous Products Act, the provisions of the Canada Labour Code or the provisions of the Accord Act, as the case may be, the screening officer may send an undertaking to the claimant setting out the measures that are required to be taken for the purpose of ensuring compliance with those provisions, except to the extent that they would require the claimant to disclose the information in respect of which the claim is made, in the manner and within the period specified in the undertaking.









16.1 (1) S’il juge, en vertu de l’alinéa 13(1)b), que la fiche de données de sécurité ou l’étiquette visée par la demande de dérogation n’est pas conforme aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, du Code canadien du travail ou de la loi de mise en oeuvre, selon le cas, l’agent de contrôle peut faire parvenir au demandeur un engagement énonçant les mesures à prendre pour veiller au respect de ces dispositions — sauf dans la mesure où celles-ci obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande — selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’engagement.



Engagement












(5) On the first day on which both subsection 110(1) of the other Act and section 153 of this Act are in force, subsection 17(1) of the French version of the Hazardous Materials Information Review Act is replaced by the following:









(5) Dès le premier jour où le paragraphe 110(1) de l’autre loi et l’article 153 de la présente loi sont tous deux en vigueur, le paragraphe 17(1) de la version française de la Loi sur le contrôle des renseignements relatifs aux matières dangereuses est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Ordre



17. (1) S’il ne reçoit pas l’engagement signé ou n’est pas convaincu que le demandeur l’a respecté, l’agent de contrôle lui ordonne de se conformer aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, du Code canadien du travail ou de la loi de mise en oeuvre, selon le cas, sauf dans la mesure où elles obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande, selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’ordre.









17. (1) S’il ne reçoit pas l’engagement signé ou n’est pas convaincu que le demandeur l’a respecté, l’agent de contrôle lui ordonne de se conformer aux dispositions de la Loi sur les produits dangereux, du Code canadien du travail ou de la loi de mise en oeuvre, selon le cas, sauf dans la mesure où elles obligeraient le demandeur à communiquer les renseignements visés par la demande, selon les modalités de forme et de temps précisées par l’ordre.



Ordre










Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



162. The provisions of this Division, other than sections 160 and 161, come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









162. Les dispositions de la présente section, à l’exception des articles 160 et 161, entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












Division 4









Section 4










R.S., c. I-3



Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act









Loi sur l’importation des boissons enivrantes



L.R., ch. I-3










2012, c. 14, s. 1



163. Paragraph 3(2)(h) of the Importation of Intoxicating Liquors Act is replaced by the following:









163. L’alinéa 3(2)h) de la Loi sur l’importation des boissons enivrantes est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 14, art. 1












(h) the importation of wine, beer or spirits from a province by an individual, if the individual brings the wine, beer or spirits or causes them to be brought into another province, in quantities and as permitted by the laws of the other province, for his or her personal consumption, and not for resale or other commercial use.









h) à l’importation de vin, de bière ou de spiritueux d’une province à une autre province par un particulier, si celui-ci les apporte ou les fait apporter selon les quantités et les modalités permises par les lois de cette dernière, pour sa consommation personnelle et non pour la revente ou autre usage commercial.














Division 5









Section 5










R.S., c. J-1



Judges Act









Loi sur les juges



L.R., ch. J-1










2012, c. 31, s. 210



164. Paragraph 13(d) of the Judges Act is replaced by the following:









164. L’alinéa 13d) de la Loi sur les juges est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 31, art. 210












(d) the 144 puisne judges of the Superior Court, $288,100 each.









d) s’agissant de chacun des cent quarante-quatre autres juges de la Cour supérieure : 288 100 $.












2012, c. 31, s. 210



165. Paragraph 20(d) of the Act is replaced by the following:









165. L’alinéa 20d) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 31, art. 210












(d) the 57 other Justices of the Court of Queen’s Bench, $288,100 each.









d) s’agissant de chacun des cinquante-sept autres juges de la Cour du Banc de la Reine : 288 100  $.














Division 6









Section 6










R.S., c. M-5



Members of Parliament Retiring Allowances Act









Loi sur les allocations de retraite des parlementaires



L.R., ch. M-5










Amendments to the Act









Modifications de la loi














166. The Members of Parliament Retiring Allowances Act is amended by adding the following after section 2.8:









166. La Loi sur les allocations de retraite des parlementaires est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 2.8, de ce qui suit :












SUSPENDED MEMBER









SUSPENSION D’UN PARLEMENTAIRE












Exclusion — pensionable service



2.9 If a member is suspended from the Senate or House of Commons, as the case may be, by a majority vote of that House, the member’s pensionable service is not to include the period that begins on the day on which the suspension starts and ends on the day fixed by a majority vote of that House for the reinstatement of the member’s entitlement to accrue pensionable service.









2.9 Si un parlementaire est suspendu par suite d’un vote majoritaire à cet effet des sénateurs ou des députés, selon le cas, est exclue de son service validable la période qui commence à la prise d’effet de la suspension et qui se termine à la date à laquelle est rétabli, par un vote majoritaire des sénateurs ou des députés, selon le cas, son droit d’accumuler du service validable.



Exclusion : service validable










Effect of suspension



2.91 Despite any provision of Part I, Part II or Part V, no contribution shall be paid by a member under those Parts in respect of any period referred to in section 2.9.









2.91 Malgré les dispositions des parties I, II et V, il n’est pas prélevé de cotisations au titre de celles-ci à l’égard de toute période visée à l’article 2.9.



Effet de la suspension










No election while suspended



2.92 (1) No election shall be made under Part I or Part II by a member during any period that begins on the day on which the suspension referred to in section 2.9 starts and ends on the later of the day on which a majority vote is passed by the Senate or House of Commons, as the case may be, which reinstates the member’s entitlement to accrue pensionable service and the day fixed by that vote for that reinstatement.









2.92 (1) Le parlementaire ne peut exercer un choix prévu aux parties I ou II pendant la période qui commence à la prise d’effet de la suspension visée à l’article 2.9 et qui se termine le jour du vote majoritaire des sénateurs ou des députés, selon le cas, qui rétablit son droit d’accumuler du service validable ou, s’il est postérieur, celui fixé par ce vote pour le rétablissement de son droit.



Aucun choix pendant la suspension










Subsections 10(1) and 32(1)



(2) The period referred to in subsection (1) is not to be included in the determination of the time limit for making an election under subsection 10(1) or 32(1).









(2) La période visée au paragraphe (1) n’est pas prise en compte dans le calcul du délai dont le parlementaire dispose pour exercer un choix prévu aux paragraphes 10(1) ou 32(1).



Paragraphes 10(1) ou 32(1)










No election — period of suspension



(3) No election shall be made under this Act in respect of any period referred to in section 2.9.









(3) Aucun choix prévu par la présente loi ne peut être exercé à l’égard de la période visée à l’article 2.9.



Aucun choix à l’égard de la période de suspension










Transitional Provision









Disposition transitoire












Member already suspended



167. If, on the day on which this Division comes into force, a person has been suspended from the Senate or House of Commons, as the case may be, by a majority vote of that House and has not had their right to accrue pensionable service reinstated by such a vote, the periods referred to in section 2.9 and subsection 2.92(1) of the Members of Parliament Retiring Allowances Act, as enacted by section 166, begin on the day on which this Division comes into force.









167. Si, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, une personne est déjà suspendue par suite d’un vote majoritaire à cet effet, émanant du Sénat ou de la Chambre des communes, et que son droit d’accumuler du service validable n’a pas été rétabli par un tel vote, les périodes visées à l’article 2.9 et au paragraphe 2.92(1) de la Loi sur les allocations de retraite des parlementaires, édictés par l’article 166, commencent le jour où la présente section entre en vigueur.



Parlementaire déjà suspendu












Division 7









Section 7










R.S., c. N-5



National Defence Act









Loi sur la défense nationale



L.R., ch. N-5










Amendments to the Act









Modifications de la loi














168. Section 17 of the National Defence Act is replaced by the following:









168. L’article 17 de la Loi sur la défense nationale est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Organization



17. (1) The Canadian Forces shall consist of those of the following elements that are from time to time organized by or under the authority of the Minister:








(a) commands, including the Royal Canadian Navy, the Canadian Army and the Royal Canadian Air Force;








(b) formations;








(c) units; and








(d) other elements.









17. (1) Les Forces canadiennes sont formées des commandements — notamment la Marine royale canadienne, l’Armée canadienne et l’Aviation royale canadienne — formations, unités et autres éléments constitués par le ministre ou sous son autorité.



Constitution










Components



(2) A unit or other element organized under subsection (1), other than a command or a formation, shall from time to time be embodied in a component of the Canadian Forces as directed by or under the authority of the Minister.









(2) L’incorporation d’une unité ou d’un autre élément — autre qu’un commandement ou une formation — constitué aux termes du paragraphe (1) dans un élément constitutif donné des Forces canadiennes se fait sur instruction du ministre ou sous son autorité.



Éléments constitutifs










R.S., c. 31 (1st Supp.), s. 60 (Sch. I, s. 7)



169. Section 21 of the Act is replaced by the following:









169. L’article 21 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 31 (1er suppl.), art. 60, ann. I, art. 7










Ranks of officers and non-commissioned members



21. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the ranks of the officers and non-commissioned members of the Canadian Forces shall be as set out in the schedule.









21. (1) Pour l’application de la présente loi, les grades des officiers et des militaires du rang des Forces canadiennes sont ceux énoncés à l’annexe.



Grades des officiers et des militaires du rang










Designation



(2) A person holding a rank set out in the schedule shall use, or be referred to by, a designation of rank prescribed in regulations made by the Governor in Council but only in the circumstances prescribed in those regulations.









(2) Les cas d’emploi des désignations prévues par règlement du gouverneur en conseil, à l’égard des titulaires des grades figurant à l’annexe, sont fixés par règlement du gouverneur en conseil.



Désignation












170. The schedule to the Act is replaced by the schedule set out in Schedule 5 to this Act.









170. L’annexe de la même loi est remplacée par l’annexe figurant à l’annexe 5 de la présente loi.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Sixty days after royal assent



171. (1) Section 168 comes into force 60 days after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









171. (1) L’article 168 entre en vigueur soixante jours après la date de sanction de la présente loi.



Soixante jours après la sanction










Order in council



(2) Sections 169 and 170 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









(2) Les articles 169 et 170 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












Division 8









Section 8










R.S., c. 1 (2nd Supp.)



Customs Act









Loi sur les douanes



L.R., ch. 1 (2e suppl.)










2005, c. 38, s. 81



172. The portion of subsection 127.1(1) of the Customs Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









172. Le passage du paragraphe 127.1(1) de la Loi sur les douanes précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 38, art. 81










Corrective measures



127.1 (1) The Minister, or any officer des-ignated by the President for the purposes of this section, may cancel a seizure made under section 110, cancel or reduce a penalty assessed under section 109.3 or an amount demanded under section 124 or refund an amount received under any of sections 117 to 119 within 90 days after the seizure, assessment or demand, if









127.1 (1) Le ministre ou l’agent que le président désigne pour l’application du présent article peut annuler une saisie faite en vertu de l’article 110, annuler ou réduire une pénalité établie en vertu de l’article 109.3 ou une somme réclamée en vertu de l’article 124 ou rembourser un montant reçu en vertu de l’un des articles 117 à 119, dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la saisie ou l’établissement de la pénalité ou la réclamation dans les cas suivants :



Mesures de redressement










2001, c. 25, s. 69



173. The portion of subsection 129(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









173. Le passage du paragraphe 129(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 25, art. 69










Request for Minister’s decision



129. (1) The following persons may, within 90 days after the date of a seizure or the service of a notice, request a decision of the Minister under section 131 by giving notice to the Minister in writing or by any other means that is satisfactory to the Minister:









129. (1) Les personnes ci-après peuvent, dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la saisie ou la signification de l’avis, en s’adressant au ministre par écrit, ou par tout autre moyen que celui-ci juge indiqué, présenter une demande en vue de lui faire rendre la décision prévue à l’article 131 :



Demande de révision










2001, c. 25, s. 75



174. Subsection 138(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









174. Le paragraphe 138(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 25, art. 75










Application procedure



(2) A person may apply for a decision by giving notice to the Minister in writing or by any other means that is satisfactory to the Minister.









(2) La demande se fait par remise d’un avis au ministre par écrit, ou sous toute autre forme prévue par celui-ci.



Procédure applicable












Division 9









Section 9












Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency









Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique










R.S., c. 41 (4th Supp.), Part I



Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act









Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique



L.R., ch. 41 (4e suppl.), partie I












175. The definition “Board” in section 3 of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act is repealed.









175. La définition de « conseil », à l’article 3 de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, est abrogée.












1995, c. 29, ss. 2(1) and (2)(E) and s. 3; 2002, c. 17, s. 4



176. The heading before section 18 and sections 18 and 19 of the Act are repealed.









176. L’intertitre précédant l’article 18 et les articles 18 et 19 de la même loi sont abrogés.



1995, ch. 29, par. 2(1) et (2)(A) et art. 3; 2002, ch. 17, art. 4










1992, c. 1, s. 10



177. Subsections 21(2) and (2.1) of the Act are repealed.









177. Les paragraphes 21(2) et (2.1) de la même loi sont abrogés.



1992, ch. 1, art. 10










Dissolution of Board









Dissolution du conseil












Appointments terminated



178. (1) The members of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Board, established by section 18 of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act, cease to hold office on the day on which this Division comes into force.









178. (1) Le mandat des membres du Conseil de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, constitué par l’article 18 de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, prend fin à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section.



Fin des mandats










No compensation



(2) Despite the provisions of any contract, agreement or order, no person who is appointed to hold office as a member of that Board has any right to claim or receive any compensation, damages, indemnity or other form of relief from Her Majesty in right of Canada or from any employee or agent of Her Majesty for ceasing to hold that office or for the abolition of that office by operation of this Division.









(2) Malgré les dispositions de tout contrat, accord ou décret, les personnes nommées membres du conseil n’ont aucun droit de réclamer ou de recevoir une compensation, des dommages-intérêts, une indemnité ou toute autre forme de redressement de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou de ses employés ou mandataires parce que leur mandat a pris fin ou en raison de l’abolition de leur poste par application de la présente section.



Absence de droit à réclamation












Division 10









Section 10












Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation









Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton












Dissolution









Dissolution












Definitions



179. The following definitions apply in sections 180 to 186.




“Agency”« Agence »



“Agency” means the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency established by section 10 of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act.




“Corporation”« Société »



“Corporation” means the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation continued under section 27 of the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation Act.




“Minister”« ministre »



“Minister” means the Minister as defined in section 3 of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act.









179. Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent aux articles 180 à 186.



Définitions




« Agence » L’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, constituée par l’article 10 de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique.



« Agence »“Agency”




« ministre » Le ministre au sens de l’article 3 de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique.



« ministre »“Minister”




« Société » La Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton maintenue en vertu de l’article 27 de la Loi sur la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton.



« Société »“Corporation”










Dissolution



180. The Corporation is dissolved on the day on which this Division comes into force.









180. La Société est dissoute à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section.



Dissolution










Transfer of assets and obligations



181. (1) On the day on which this Division comes into force,








(a) the Corporation’s assets and those of its subsidiaries, other than the real property described in paragraph (c), are transferred to the Agency;








(b) the Corporation’s obligations and those of its subsidiaries, other than those described in paragraph (d), are assumed by the Agency;








(c) the administration of all real property in which the Corporation has any right, title or interest is transferred to the Minister of Public Works and Government Services; and








(d) the Corporation’s obligations and those of its subsidiaries to former employees of the Cape Breton Development Corporation established by the Cape Bret-on Development Corporation Act that were acquired by the Corporation or its subsidiaries on December 31, 2009 are assumed by Her Majesty in right of Canada as represented by the Minister of Public Works and Government Services.









181. (1) À la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section :



Transfert des éléments d’actif et obligations




a) les éléments d’actif de la Société et de ses filiales, sauf les biens réels visés à l’alinéa c), sont transférés à l’Agence;








b) les obligations de la Société et de ses filiales, sauf celles visées à l’alinéa d), sont assumées par l’Agence;








c) la gestion des biens réels sur lesquels la Société a un droit, titre de propriété ou intérêt est transférée au ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux;








d) les obligations de la Société et de ses filiales envers les anciens employés de la Société de développement du Cap-Breton, constituée par la Loi sur la Société de développement du Cap-Breton, qui ont été acquises par la Société ou ses filiales le 31 décembre 2009, sont assumées par Sa Majesté du chef du Canada, représentée par le ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux.














Credits transferred — Department of Public Works and Government Services



(2) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any of the Corporation’s expenditures related to any real property described in paragraph (1)(c) and any of the Corporation’s expenditures related to any of its obligations described in paragraph (1)(d), and that is unexpended, is deemed to have been appropriated to defray any expenditures of the Department of Public Works and Government Services.









(2) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale aux dépenses de la Société liées aux biens réels visés à l’alinéa (1)c) et aux dépenses de celle-ci liées à ses obligations visées à l’alinéa (1)d) sont réputées être affectées aux dépenses du ministère des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux.



Transfert de crédits : ministère des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux










Credits transferred — Agency



(3) Any money, other than the money referred to in subsection (2), that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any of the Corporation’s expenditures, and that is unexpended, is deemed to have been appropriated to defray any of the Agency’s expenditures.









(3) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale aux dépenses de la Société, sauf les sommes visées au paragraphe (2), sont réputées être affectées aux dépenses de l’Agence.



Transfert de crédits : Agence










Appointment to Agency



182. (1) Despite subsection 15(1) of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act, every employee of the Corporation or of any of its subsidiaries, other than an employee described in subsection (2), is deemed, on the day on which this Division comes into force, to be a person appointed under the Public Service Employment Act to a position in the Agency and to be an employee as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Public Service Employment Act.









182. (1) Malgré le paragraphe 15(1) de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique, tout employé de la Société ou d’une de ses filiales, sauf celui visé au paragraphe (2), est réputé, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, avoir été nommé en vertu de la Loi sur l’emploi dans la fonction publique à un poste au sein de l’Agence et être un fonctionnaire au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de cette loi.



Nomination auprès de l’Agence










Appointment to Department of Public Works and Government Services



(2) Every employee of the Corporation or of any of its subsidiaries whose functions relate to any real property or obligations described in paragraph 181(1)(c) or (d), as the case may be, is deemed, on the day on which this Division comes into force, to be a person appointed under the Public Service Employment Act to a position in the Department of Public Works and Government Services and to be an employee as defined in subsection 2(1) of that Act.









(2) L’employé de la Société ou d’une de ses filiales dont les attributions concernent les biens réels ou les obligations visés respectivement aux alinéas 181(1)c) et d) est réputé, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, avoir été nommé en vertu de la Loi sur l’emploi dans la fonction publique à un poste au sein du ministère des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux et être un fonctionnaire au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de cette loi.



Nomination auprès du ministère des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux










Employees



(3) Every employee referred to in subsection (1) or (2) is entitled








(a) to receive in the position referred to in subsection (1) or (2) the same rate of pay that they were receiving as an employee of the Corporation or of any of its subsidiaries for as long as that rate of pay is higher than the rate of pay provided for by the terms and conditions of employment that apply or the terms and conditions of employment set out in the collective agreement that applies, as the case may be, to that position;








(b) to retain any vacation and sick leave credits that they had earned during their employment at the Corporation or at any of its subsidiaries; and








(c) to be credited with their accumulated years of service at the Corporation, at a subsidiary of the Corporation or at the Cape Breton Development Corporation established by the Cape Breton Development Corporation Act, for the purpose of determining their annual vacation entitlement in the public service.








In all other respects, the employee is governed by the terms and conditions of employment that apply or the terms and conditions of employment set out in the collective agreement that applies, as the case may be, to that position.









(3) L’employé visé aux paragraphes (1) ou (2) a le droit :



Employé




a) de recevoir, pour le poste mentionné aux paragraphes (1) ou (2), le taux de rémunération auquel il avait droit comme employé de la Société ou d’une de ses filiales, tant que ce taux est plus élevé que celui prévu par les conditions d’emploi prévues par la convention collective qui est applicable à ce poste ou, à défaut d’une telle convention collective, par les conditions d’emploi applicables à ce poste;








b) de conserver les crédits de congés annuels et de congés de maladie auxquels il avait droit comme employé de la Société ou d’une de ses filiales;








c) de voir porter à son crédit, aux fins d’établissement de ses congés annuels au sein de la fonction publique, les années de service cumulées au sein de la Société, d’une filiale de celle-ci ou de la Société de développement du Cap-Breton constituée sous le régime de la Loi sur la Société de développement du Cap-Breton.








À tout autre égard, il est régi par les conditions d’emploi prévues par la convention collective qui est applicable à ce poste ou, à défaut d’une telle convention collective, par les conditions d’emploi applicables à ce poste.














Appointments terminated



183. (1) The members of the Board of Directors of the Corporation cease to hold office on the day on which this Division comes into force.









183. (1) Le mandat des membres du conseil d’administration de la Société prend fin à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section.



Fin des mandats










No compensation



(2) Despite the provisions of any contract, agreement or order, no person who is appointed to hold office as a member of the Corporation’s Board of Directors, except the Chief Executive Officer, has any right to claim or receive any compensation, damages, indemnity or other form of relief from Her Majesty in right of Canada or from any employee or agent of Her Majesty for ceasing to hold that office or for the abolition of that office by the operation of this Division.









(2) Malgré les dispositions de tout contrat, accord ou décret, les personnes nommées membres du conseil de la Société, exception faite du premier dirigeant, n’ont aucun droit de réclamer ou de recevoir une compensation, des dommages-intérêts, une indemnité ou toute autre forme de dédommagement de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou de ses employés ou mandataires parce que leur mandat a pris fin ou en raison de l’abolition de leur poste par application de la présente section.



Absence de droit à réclamation










Provisions not applicable



184. Subsections 91(1) and (3) of the Financial Administration Act do not apply in respect of the dissolution of, or the sale or other disposal of the assets of, any of the Corporation’s subsidiaries.









184. Les paragraphes 91(1) et (3) de Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques ne s’appliquent pas à la dissolution, ni à la vente ou, d’une façon générale, à la disposition des éléments d’actif des filiales de la Société.



Dispositions non applicables










Closing out affairs



185. After the Corporation is dissolved, the Minister may do any thing and perform any act that is necessary for or incidental to closing out the Corporation’s affairs and those of its subsidiaries.









185. Le ministre peut prendre, après la dissolution de la Société, toute mesure nécessaire ou liée à sa liquidation et à celle de ses filiales.



Liquidation










Continuation of legal proceedings



186. Any action, suit or other legal proceeding to which the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries is party that is pending in any court on the day on which this Division comes into force may be continued by or against Her Majesty in right of Canada in the same manner and to the same extent as it could have been continued by or against the Corporation or subsidiary, as the case may be.









186. Sa Majesté du chef du Canada prend la suite de la Société ou de l’une ou l’autre de ses filiales, selon le cas, au même titre et dans les mêmes conditions que celle-ci, comme partie dans les instances judiciaires en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section et auxquelles la Société ou sa filiale, selon le cas, est partie.



Instances judiciaires en cours








R.S., c. 41 (4th Supp.), Part I



Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act









Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique



L.R., ch. 41 (4e suppl.), partie I










2002, c. 17, s. 3



187. Paragraph 13(h.1) of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Act is replaced by the following:









187. L’alinéa 13h.1) de la Loi sur l’Agence de promotion économique du Canada atlantique est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2002, ch. 17, art. 3












(h.1) acquire the assets and assume the obligations of the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation or any of that Corporation’s subsidiaries;






(h.2) in respect of any security interest that it acquires from the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation or any of that Corporation’s subsidiaries and that was held by that Corporation or any of those subsidiaries in respect of a loan, investment or agreement that was acquired by that Corporation or any of those subsidiaries,






(i) hold any security interest,






(ii) surrender any security interest,






(iii) realize any security interest, or






(iv) exchange, sell, assign or otherwise dispose of any security interest;






(h.3) hold or exercise, or surrender, sell, assign or otherwise dispose of, a stock option, share or other similar financial instrument that it acquires from the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation or any of that Corporation’s subsidiaries;






(h.4) do all things, other than those mentioned in paragraphs (h.2) and (h.3), that are necessary for or incidental to the administration, management, control or disposal of the assets and obligations that it acquires or assumes from the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation or any of that Corporation’s subsidiaries; and









h.1) acquérir les éléments d’actif et assumer les obligations de la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton ou de l’une de ses filiales;






h.2) dans le cas où elle acquiert de la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton ou de l’une de ses filiales une sûreté qui était détenue par cette société ou filiale concernant un prêt, un investissement ou un accord que cette société ou filiale a obtenu :






(i) détenir toute sûreté,






(ii) renoncer à toute sûreté,






(iii) réaliser toute sûreté,






(iv) échanger, céder ou vendre toute sûreté ou en disposer autrement;






h.3) détenir, exercer ou remettre des options d’achat d’actions, des actions ou tout autre instrument financier de même nature qu’elle a acquis de la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton ou de l’une de ses filiales ou les céder ou les vendre, ou en disposer autrement;






h.4) prendre toute mesure nécessaire ou utile, exception faite des mesures prévues aux alinéas h.2) et h.3), au contrôle, à la gestion ou à la disposition des éléments d’actif et des obligations de la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton ou de l’une de ses filiales que l’Agence a acquis ou assumées, selon le cas;












Consequential Amendments









Modifications corrélatives










R.S., c. F-11



Financial Administration Act









Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques



L.R., ch. F-11










1998, c. 10, s. 173



188. Paragraph 89.1(3)(b) of the Financial Administration Act is replaced by the following:









188. L’alinéa 89.1(3)b) de la Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 10, art. 173












(b) a direction given under subsection 5(2) of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation Act, subsection 9(2) of the Canadian Commercial Corporation Act or subsection 11(1) of the Canadian Dairy Commission Act; or









b) en vertu du paragraphe 5(2) de la Loi sur la Société canadienne d’hypothèques et de logement, du paragraphe 9(2) de la Loi sur la Corporation canadienne commerciale ou du paragraphe 11(1) de la Loi sur la Commission canadienne du lait;












R.S., c. 41 (4th Supp.), s. 51



189. Part I of Schedule III to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









189. La partie I de l’annexe III de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 41 (4e suppl.), art. 51












Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation






Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton 









Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton 






Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation 










R.S., c. M-13; 2000, c. 8, s. 2



Payments in Lieu of Taxes Act









Loi sur les paiements versés en remplacement d’impôts



L.R., ch. M-13; 2000, ch. 8, art. 2










SOR/99-333, s. 2



190. Schedule III to the Payments in Lieu of Taxes Act is amended by striking out the following:









190. L’annexe III de la Loi sur les paiements versés en remplacement d’impôts est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



DORS/99-333, art. 2












Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation






Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton









Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton 






Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation 










1991, c. 30



Public Sector Compensation Act









Loi sur la rémunération du secteur public



1991, ch. 30












191. Schedule II to the Public Sector Compensation Act is amended by striking out the following:









191. L’annexe II de la Loi sur la rémunération du secteur public est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :














Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation






Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton









Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton 






Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation 












Repeal









Abrogation












Repeal



192. The Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation Act, Part II of chapter 41 of the 4th Supplement to the Revised Statues of Canada, 1985, is repealed.









192. La Loi sur la Société d’expansion du Cap-Breton, partie II du chapitre 41 du 4e supplément des Lois révisées du Canada (1985), est abrogée.



Abrogation












Division 11









Section 11










1990, c. 3



Museums Act









Loi sur les musées



1990, ch. 3










Amendment to the Act









Modification de la loi














193. Section 9 of the Museums Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









193. L’article 9 de la Loi sur les musées est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Support



(3) The Canadian Museum of History may support other museums or organizations that have a purpose that is complementary to its own by administering programs that








(a) provide online content; and








(b) support the development of online content, including by providing financial assist-ance.









(3) Le Musée canadien de l’histoire peut fournir du soutien aux autres musées ou à des organismes à vocation complémentaire à la sienne en administrant des programmes qui visent :



Soutien




a) à fournir du contenu en ligne;








b) à soutenir l’élaboration d’un tel contenu, notamment par l’octroi d’aide financière.














Transitional Provisions









Dispositions transitoires












Definitions









Définitions












Definitions



194. The following definitions apply in sections 195 to 204.




“Minister”« ministre »



“Minister” means the Minister of Canadian Heritage.




“Museum”« musée »



“Museum” means the Canadian Museum of History.









194. Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent aux articles 195 à 204.



Définitions




« ministre » Le ministre du Patrimoine canadien.



« ministre »“Minister”




« musée » Le Musée canadien de l’histoire.



« musée »“Museum”










Online Works of Reference









Ouvrages de référence en ligne












Definition of “program”



195. In sections 196 to 199, “program” means the program known as the “Online Works of Reference”.









195. Aux articles 196 à 199, « programme » s’entend du programme appelé « Ouvrages de référence en ligne ».



Définition de « programme »










Responsibility for program transferred



196. On the day on which this section comes into force, the responsibility for the administration of the program is transferred from the Minister to the Museum.









196. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, la responsabilité de l’administration du programme est transférée du ministre au musée.



Transfert de responsabilité










Credits transferred



197. Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament for the fiscal year in which this section comes into force to defray any expenditures related to the program and that, on the day on which this section comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to have been appropriated to defray any of the Museum’s expenditures related to the program.









197. Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, par toute loi fédérale aux dépenses liées au programme sont réputées, à cette date, affectées aux dépenses du musée liées au programme.



Transfert de crédits










Obligations, contracts and authorizations



198. On the day on which this section comes into force,








(a) the Minister’s obligations that relate to the program are assumed by the Museum;








(b) contracts entered into by the Minister that relate to the program and are still in force are deemed to have been entered into by the Museum;








(c) permits, licences and other authorizations issued to the Minister that relate exclusively to the program and are still valid are transferred to the Museum; and








(d) permits, licences and other authorizations issued by the Minister that relate to the program and are still valid are deemed to have been issued by the Museum.









198. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article :



Obligations, contrats et autorisations




a) les obligations du ministre liées au programme sont assumées par le musée;








b) les contrats liés au programme qui ont été conclus par le ministre et qui sont toujours en vigueur sont réputés avoir été conclus par le musée;








c) les autorisations, notamment les permis et les licences, liées exclusivement au programme qui ont été délivrées au ministre et qui sont toujours valides sont transférées au musée;








d) les autorisations, notamment les permis et les licences, liées au programme qui ont été délivrées par le ministre et qui sont toujours valides sont réputées avoir été délivrées par le musée.














Assets



199. On the day on which this section comes into force, the assets of the Department of Canadian Heritage that relate exclusively to the program are transferred to the Museum.









199. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, les éléments d’actif du ministère du Patrimoine canadien liés exclusivement au programme sont transférés au musée.



Actifs










Virtual Museum of Canada









Musée virtuel du Canada












Definition of “program”



200. In sections 201 to 204, “program” means the program known as the “Virtual Museum of Canada”.









200. Aux articles 201 à 204, « programme » s’entend du programme appelé « Musée virtuel du Canada ».



Définition de « programme »










Responsibility for program transferred



201. On the day on which this section comes into force, the responsibility for the administration of the program is transferred from the Minister to the Museum.









201. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, la responsabilité de l’administration du programme est transférée du ministre au musée.



Transfert de responsabilité










Credits transferred



202. Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament for the fiscal year in which this section comes into force to defray any expenditures related to the program and that, on the day on which this section comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to have been appropriated to defray any of the Museum’s expenditures related to the program.









202. Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, par toute loi fédérale aux dépenses liées au programme sont réputées, à cette date, affectées aux dépenses du musée liées au programme.



Transfert de crédits










Obligations, contracts and authorizations



203. On the day on which this section comes into force,








(a) the Minister’s obligations that relate to the program are assumed by the Museum;








(b) contracts entered into by the Minister that relate to the program and are still in force are deemed to have been entered into by the Museum;








(c) permits, licences and other authorizations issued to the Minister that relate exclusively to the program and are still valid are transferred to the Museum; and








(d) permits, licences and other authorizations issued by the Minister that relate to the program and are still valid are deemed to have been issued by the Museum.









203. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article :



Obligations, contrats et autorisations




a) les obligations du ministre liées au programme sont assumées par le musée;








b) les contrats liés au programme qui ont été conclus par le ministre et qui sont toujours en vigueur sont réputés avoir été conclus par le musée;








c) les autorisations, notamment les permis et les licences, liées exclusivement au programme qui ont été délivrées au ministre et qui sont toujours valides sont transférées au musée;








d) les autorisations, notamment les permis et les licences, liées au programme qui ont été délivrées par le ministre et qui sont toujours valides sont réputées avoir été délivrées par le musée.














Assets



204. On the day on which this section comes into force, the assets of the Department of Canadian Heritage that relate exclusively to the program are transferred to the Museum.









204. À la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent article, les éléments d’actif du ministère du Patrimoine canadien liés exclusivement au programme sont transférés au musée.



Actifs










Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



205. The provisions of this Division come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









205. Les dispositions de la présente section entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












Division 12









Section 12










1990, c. 4



Nordion and Theratronics Divestiture Authorization Act









Loi autorisant l’aliénation de Nordion et de Theratronics



1990, ch. 4










1994, c. 24, s. 34(2)(F)



206. The definitions “Nordion” and “Theratronics” in subsection 2(1) of the Nordion and Theratronics Divestiture Authorization Act are replaced by the following:









206. Les définitions de « Nordion » et de « Theratronics », au paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi autorisant l’aliénation de Nordion et de Theratronics, sont respectivement remplacées par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 24, par. 34(2)(F)










“Nordion”« Nordion »



“Nordion” means Nordion International Inc., a corporation incorporated under the Canada Business Corporations Act or any successor to that corporation;




“Theratronics”« Theratronics »



“Theratronics” means Theratronics International Limited, a corporation incorporated under the Canada Business Corporations Act or any successor to that corporation.









« Nordion » Nordion International Inc., société constituée sous le régime de la Loi canadienne sur les sociétés par actions, ou tout successeur de cette société.



« Nordion »“Nordion”




« Theratronics » Theratronics International Limitée, société constituée sous le régime de la Loi canadienne sur les sociétés par actions, ou tout successeur de cette société.



« Theratronics »“Theratronics”












207. (1) Subsection 6(3) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (a), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the following after paragraph (b):









207. (1) Le paragraphe 6(3) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa b), de ce qui suit :














(c) by any person if the acquisition of those shares by that person






(i) is an investment that, under sections 21 to 23 of the Investment Canada Act, is, or is deemed, likely to be of net benefit to Canada, and






(ii) is not prohibited under Part IV.1 of that Act.









c) par une personne si l’acquisition des actions par cette personne :






(i) d’une part, est ou est réputée être un investissement vraisemblablement à l’avantage net du Canada aux termes des articles 21 à 23 de la Loi sur Investissement Canada,






(ii) d’autre part, n’est pas interdite par la partie IV.1 de cette loi.














(2) Section 6 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):









(2) L’article 6 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (3), de ce qui suit :












Exception — subsequent holders



(3.1) No provision imposing constraints under subsection (1) and no regulation referred to in subsection (2) apply in respect of any voting shares of Nordion referred to in paragraph (3)(c) that are subsequently held by any other person.









(3.1) Aucune des restrictions découlant du paragraphe (1) ni aucun des règlements visés au paragraphe (2) ne s’appliquent aux actions avec droit de vote visées à l’alinéa (3)c) qui sont détenues subséquemment par une autre personne.



Exception : détenteurs subséquents












208. Section 7 of the Act is renumbered as subsection 7(1) and is amended by adding the following:









208. L’article 7 de la même loi devient le paragraphe 7(1) et est modifié par adjonction de ce qui suit :












Exception



(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if a person holds voting shares referred to in paragraph 6(3)(c) or subsection 6(3.1).









(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas si une personne détient des actions avec droit de vote visées à l’alinéa 6(3)c) ou au paragraphe 6(3.1).



Exception












209. The portion of section 8 of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









209. L’article 8 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Provisions applicable to Theratronics



8. Sections 5 to 7, with the exception of paragraph 6(3)(c) and subsections 6(3.1) and 7(2), apply to Theratronics as if









8. Les articles 5 à 7, exception faite de l’alinéa 6(3)c) et des paragraphes 6(3.1) et 7(2), s’appliquent également à Theratronics, sauf qu’au paragraphe 6(1) il faut lire quarante-neuf pour cent au lieu de vingt-cinq pour cent.



Application à Theratronics












Division 13









Section 13










1991, c. 46



Bank Act









Loi sur les banques



1991, ch. 46












210. The Bank Act is amended by adding the following after section 415.1:









210. La Loi sur les banques est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 415.1, de ce qui suit :












Derivatives — regulations



415.2 (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations respecting a bank’s activities in relation to derivatives.









415.2 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règlements concernant les activités de la banque qui sont liées aux instruments dérivés.



Instruments dérivés —règlements










Definition of “derivative”



(2) In this section, “derivative” means an option, swap, futures contract, forward contract or other financial or commodity contract or instrument whose market price, value, delivery obligations, payment obligations or settlement obligations are derived from, referenced to or based on an underlying interest, including a price, rate, index, value, variable, event, probability or thing.









(2) Au présent article, « instrument dérivé » s’entend d’une option, d’un swap, d’un contrat à terme, d’un contrat à livrer ou de tout autre contrat ou instrument, qu’il soit financier ou sur marchandises, dont le cours, la valeur ou les obligations de livraison, de paiement ou de règlement sont dérivés de tout élément sous-jacent — prix, taux, index, valeur, variable, événement, probabilité ou autre chose —, calculés en fonction de cet élément ou fondés sur celui-ci.



Définition de « instrument dérivé »










Benchmarks — regulations



415.3 (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations respecting a bank’s activities in relation to benchmarks.









415.3 (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règlements concernant les activités de la banque qui sont liées aux indices de référence.



Indices de référence — règlements










Definition of “benchmark”



(2) In this section, “benchmark” means a price, estimate, rate, index or value that is








(a) determined from time to time by reference to an assessment of one or more underlying interests;








(b) made available to the public, either free of charge or on payment; and








(c) used for reference for any purpose, including








(i) determining the interest payable, or other sums that are due, under loan agreements or other financial contracts or instruments,








(ii) determining the value of financial instruments or the price at which they may be bought or sold, and








(iii) measuring the performance of financial instruments.









(2) Au présent article, « indice de référence » s’entend du prix, de l’estimation, du taux, de l’index ou de la valeur qui remplit les conditions suivantes :



Définition de « indice de référence »




a) il est périodiquement fixé en fonction d’une évaluation d’un ou de plusieurs intérêts sous-jacents;








b) il est mis à la disposition du public, à titre gratuit ou non;








c) il est utilisé comme référence à n’importe quelle fin, notamment :








(i) pour fixer l’intérêt ou toute autre somme à payer au titre d’accords relatifs à un prêt ou au titre de tout autre contrat ou instrument financiers,








(ii) pour fixer la valeur ou le prix d’achat ou de vente de tout instrument financier,








(iii) pour mesurer la performance de tout instrument financier.
















Division 14









Section 14










1991, c. 47



Insurance Companies Act









Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances



1991, ch. 47












211. (1) Subsection 237(2) of the Insurance Companies Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (a):









211. (1) Le paragraphe 237(2) de la Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa a), de ce qui suit :














(a.01) respecting the process that precedes the calling of a special meeting under subsection (1.1), including the development of a conversion proposal, and respecting the calling of that meeting;









a.01) régir le processus précédant la convocation de l’assemblée extraordinaire visée au paragraphe (1.1), notamment l’élaboration d’une proposition de transformation, et régir la convocation de cette assemblée;














(2) Paragraph 237(2)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 237(2)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(c) governing the ownership of shares issued by a mutual company that has been converted into a company with common shares, including limiting the circumstances in which the Minister may give approval under subsection 407(1);









c) régir la propriété des actions d’une société mutuelle transformée en société avec actions ordinaires, notamment limiter les circonstances dans lesquelles le ministre peut donner l’agrément visé au paragraphe 407(1);














(3) Section 237 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(3) L’article 237 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Regulations made under paragraph (2)(a.01)



(2.1) Regulations made under paragraph (2)(a.01) may provide for court intervention in the process referred to in that paragraph, including the circumstances in which the court is to be seized of any matter in relation to that process, and may govern the court’s powers and procedures in that regard. They may also govern authorizations by the Superintendent in respect of notices to be sent in the context of that process.









(2.1) Les règlements pris en vertu de l’alinéa (2)a.01) peuvent prévoir l’intervention du tribunal dans le cadre du processus visé à cet alinéa, notamment les circonstances dans lesquelles le tribunal doit être saisi de questions relatives à ce processus, et régir les pouvoirs et la procédure du tribunal à cet égard. Ils peuvent aussi régir les autorisations du surintendant relativement aux préavis envoyés dans le cadre de ce processus.



Règlements pris en vertu de l’alinéa (2)a.01)












Division 15









Section 15












Regulatory Cooperation









Coopération en matière de réglementation










1993, c. 16



Motor Vehicle Safety Act









Loi sur la sécurité automobile



1993, ch. 16












212. The long title of the French version of the Motor Vehicle Safety Act is replaced by the following:









212. Le titre intégral de la version française de la Loi sur la sécurité automobile est remplacé par ce qui suit :














Loi régissant la fabrication et l’importation des véhicules et équipements automobiles en vue de limiter les risques de mort, de blessures et de dommages matériels et environnementaux









Loi régissant la fabrication et l’importation des véhicules et équipements automobiles en vue de limiter les risques de mort, de blessures et de dommages matériels et environnementaux












1999, c. 33, s. 350



213. (1) The definitions “national safety mark”, “standard” and “vehicle” in section 2 of the Act are replaced by the following:









213. (1) Les définitions de « marque nationale de sécurité », « norme » et « véhicule », à l’article 2 de la même loi, sont respectivement remplacées par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 33, art. 350










“national safety mark”« marque nationale de sécurité »



“national safety mark” means a prescribed expression, symbol or abbreviation or any combination of them;




“standard”« norme »



“standard” means a standard that governs the design, manufacture, functioning or marking of vehicles or equipment for the purpose of reducing, directly or indirectly, the risk of death, injury or property damage from vehicle use, including a standard aimed at increasing the use of safety features by the public or facilitating the creation, recording or retrieval of information;




“vehicle”« véhicule »



“vehicle” means any vehicle that is designed to be, or is capable of being, driven or drawn on roads by any means other than muscular power exclusively, but does not include any vehicle that is designed to run exclusively on rails.









« marque nationale de sécurité » Le signe, la mention ou l’abréviation prévus par règlement ou toute combinaison de ceux-ci.



« marque nationale de sécurité »“national safety mark”




« norme » Règle ou norme s’appliquant à la conception, à la construction ou fabrication, au fonctionnement ou au marquage des matériels en vue de limiter, directement ou indirectement, les risques de mort, de blessures ou de dommages matériels dus à l’utilisation des véhicules; sont notamment visées les normes visant à favoriser l’utilisation par le public d’éléments de sécurité ou à faciliter la création, l’enregistrement ou l’extraction de renseignements.



« norme »“standard”




« véhicule » Tout véhicule conçu pour être conduit ou tiré, ou pouvant l’être, sur les routes par des moyens autres que la seule force musculaire; la présente définition ne vise toutefois pas les véhicules qui sont conçus pour circuler exclusivement sur rail. 



« véhicule »“vehicle”












(2) The definition “fabrication” ou “construction” in section 2 of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) La définition de « fabrication » ou « construction », à l’article 2 de la version française de la même loi, est remplacée par ce qui suit :












« fabrication » ou « construction »“manufacture”



« fabrication » ou « construction » S’agissant d’un véhicule, ensemble des opérations de réalisation de celui-ci y compris les modifications qui y sont apportées, jusqu’à sa vente au premier usager.









« fabrication » ou « construction » S’agissant d’un véhicule, ensemble des opérations de réalisation de celui-ci y compris les modifications qui y sont apportées, jusqu’à sa vente au premier usager.



« fabrication » ou « construction »“manufacture”












214. Subsection 3(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









214. Le paragraphe 3(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Use of marks



(2) A company authorized by the Minister, as provided for in the regulations, may apply a national safety mark to a vehicle or equipment, as provided for in the regulations.









(2) Les entreprises autorisées par le ministre, conformément aux règlements, peuvent apposer des marques nationales de sécurité sur des matériels conformément aux règlements.



Usage des marques










Provision of address



(2.1) The company shall provide the Minister with the address of the premises at which the national safety mark is to be applied.









(2.1) L’entreprise communique au ministre l’adresse des locaux où l’apposition de la marque nationale de sécurité est effectuée.



Communication de l’adresse












215. The heading before section 5 of the Act is replaced by the following:









215. L’intertitre précédant l’article 5 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS









EXIGENCES RELATIVES AUX MATÉRIELS














216. (1) Paragraph 5(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









216. (1) L’alinéa 5(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) evidence of that conformity has been obtained and produced as provided for in the regulations or, if the regulations so provide, to the Minister’s satisfaction;









b) justification, conformément aux règlements, de la conformité ou, si les règlements le prévoient, à la satisfaction du ministre;














(2) Paragraphs 5(1)(d) to (h) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les alinéas 5(1)d) à h) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














(d) prescribed information is marked on the vehicle or equipment as provided for in the regulations;






(e) prescribed documentation or prescribed accessories accompany the vehicle or equipment as provided for in the regulations;






(f) prescribed information relating to the operation of the vehicle or equipment is disseminated as provided for in the regulations;






(g) records are maintained and furnished, as provided for in the regulations, in relation to the design, manufacture, testing and field performance of the vehicle or equipment, for the purpose of






(i) enabling an inspector to determine whether the vehicle or equipment conforms to all requirements applicable to it, and






(ii) facilitating the identification and anal-ysis of defects referred to in subsection 10(1); and






(h) in the case of equipment, the company maintains, as provided for in the regulations, a registration system by which any person who has purchased equipment manufactured, imported or sold by the company and who wishes to be identified may be so identified.









d) apposition sur les matériels, conformément aux règlements, des renseignements réglementaires;






e) fourniture avec les matériels, conformément aux règlements, des documents et accessoires réglementaires;






f) diffusion, conformément aux règlements, de tous renseignements réglementaires relatifs au fonctionnement ou à l’utilisation des matériels;






g) tenue et fourniture, conformément aux règlements, de dossiers relatifs à la conception, à la fabrication, aux essais ou au rendement sur le terrain des matériels, en vue de permettre à l’inspecteur de procéder aux vérifications de conformité à toutes les exigences applicables et de faciliter la détection et l’analyse des défauts visés au paragraphe 10(1);






h) tenue par l’entreprise, conformément aux règlements, d’un fichier permettant d’identifier tout acheteur d’équipements — fabriqués, importés ou vendus par l’entreprise — qui souhaite y être identifié.














(3) Subsection 5(2) of the Act is repealed.









(3) Le paragraphe 5(2) de la même loi est abrogé.














217. (1) Paragraph 7(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









217. (1) L’alinéa 7(1)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) before the importation, the person importing the vehicle or equipment makes a declaration, as provided for in the regulations, that the vehicle or equipment






(i) will be used in Canada solely for a prescribed purpose,






(ii) will remain in Canada for a period of not more than one year or any other period that is specified by the Minister, and






(iii) meets or will meet any other prescribed requirement; or









a) satisfont ou satisferont aux exigences réglementaires, ne seront utilisés qu’à des fins prévues par règlement et ne se trouveront au Canada que pour une période fixée par le ministre ou n’excédant pas un an, l’importateur ayant fait, avant que l’importation ait eu lieu et conformément aux règlements, une déclaration à cet effet;














(2) Paragraph 7(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 7(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) the vehicle or equipment is passing through Canada to another country or is exclusively for use by a visitor to Canada.









b) sont en transit au Canada ou utilisés exclusivement par une personne de passage.














(3) Section 7 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









(3) L’article 7 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Export or destruction



(1.01) A person who imports a vehicle or equipment under paragraph (1)(a) shall, as provided for in the regulations, export or destroy the vehicle or equipment before the end of the period referred to in subparagraph (1)(a)(ii).









(1.01) Avant l’expiration de la période visée à l’alinéa (1)a), l’importateur, conformément aux règlements, exporte ou détruit les matériels importés en application de cet alinéa.



Exportation ou destruction










Exception — donation



(1.02) Despite subsection (1.01), a person who imports a vehicle under paragraph (1)(a) may, with the Minister’s approval, donate it as provided for in the regulations.









(1.02) Malgré le paragraphe (1.01), l’importateur peut donner, avec l’approbation du ministre et conformément aux règlements, tout véhicule importé en application de l’alinéa (1)a).



Exception — donation












(4) Subsection 7(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 7(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Vehicles from the United States or Mexico



(2) Sections 5 and 6 do not apply to the importation of a vehicle that has been sold at the retail level in the United States or that is a prescribed vehicle from Mexico if








(a) the vehicle meets any prescribed requirements; and








(b) the person importing the vehicle makes a declaration, as provided for in the regulations, that the vehicle will be, before being presented for registration by a province and within the prescribed period,








(i) brought into compliance with any prescribed requirements, and








(ii) certified, as provided for in the regulations, as compliant with the requirements referred to in subparagraph (i) by the person designated in the regulations.









(2) Les articles 5 et 6 ne s’appliquent pas à l’importation d’un véhicule vendu au détail aux États-Unis ou d’un véhicule réglementaire provenant du Mexique si, à la fois :



Véhicule provenant des États-Unis ou du Mexique




a) le véhicule respecte les exigences réglementaires;








b) l’importateur fait, conformément aux règlements, une déclaration portant que, avant sa présentation pour immatriculation par une province et dans le délai réglementaire, le véhicule sera rendu conforme aux exigences réglementaires et sera certifié conforme à ces exigences, conformément aux règlements par la personne désignée par règlement.














Importation for components



(2.1) Sections 5 and 6 do not apply to the importation of a vehicle that has been sold at the retail level in the United States or that is a prescribed vehicle from Mexico if the person importing the vehicle makes a declaration, as provided for in the regulations, that the vehicle








(a) will not be presented for registration by a province;








(b) will be registered, as provided for in the regulations, by the person designated in the regulations; and








(c) will be dismantled for its components.









(2.1) Les articles 5 et 6 ne s’appliquent pas à l’importation d’un véhicule vendu au détail aux États-Unis ou d’un véhicule réglementaire provenant du Mexique si l’importateur fait, conformément aux règlements, une déclaration portant que, à la fois :



Importation pour les pièces




a) le véhicule ne sera pas présenté pour immatriculation par une province;








b) le véhicule sera enregistré, conformément aux règlements, auprès de la personne désignée par règlement;








c) le véhicule sera démonté pour ses pièces.
















(5) Subsection 7(4) of the Act is repealed.









(5) Le paragraphe 7(4) de la même loi est abrogé.














(6) Subsection 7(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(6) Le paragraphe 7(5) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Declarations binding



(5) A person who makes a declaration under this section shall comply with the declaration.









(5) L’auteur d’une déclaration visée au présent article est tenu de se conformer à celle-ci.



Auteur lié












218. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 7:









218. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 7, de ce qui suit :












Analytical aids



8. A company that applies a national safety mark to any vehicle or equipment or that imports any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards are prescribed shall, on the Minister’ request, provide the Minister with the means to retrieve and analyse information created or recorded by the vehicle or equipment.









8. L’entreprise qui appose une marque nationale de sécurité sur des matériels ou qui importe des matériels d’une catégorie régie par des normes réglementaires fournit au ministre, à sa demande, les moyens lui permettant d’extraire ou d’analyser les renseignements créés ou recueillis par les matériels.



Moyens d’analyse












219. The portion of subsection 9(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









219. Le passage du paragraphe 9(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Exemption from standards



9. (1) On application by a company as provided for in the regulations, the Governor in Council may, by order, grant an exemption for a specified period, in accordance with any conditions specified in the order, for any model of vehicle manufactured or imported by the company from conformity with any prescribed standard if conformity with that standard would, in the opinion of the Governor in Council,









9. (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut par décret, pour une période et aux conditions qui y sont précisées, dispenser une entreprise de se conformer aux normes réglementaires applicables à un modèle de véhicule qu’elle fabrique ou importe, pourvu que l’entreprise en fasse la demande, conformément aux règlements, et qu’il juge que, par l’application de ces normes, se réaliserait l’une des conditions suivantes :



Dispense












220. The heading before section 10 of the Act is replaced by the following:









220. L’intertitre précédant l’article 10 est remplacé par ce qui suit :












NOTICE OF DEFECT AND OF NON-COMPLIANCE









AVIS DE DÉFAUT ET DE NON-CONFORMITÉ














221. (1) Subsections 10(1) to (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:









221. (1) Les paragraphes 10(1) à (4) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Notice of defect



10. (1) A company that applies a national safety mark to any vehicle or equipment, sells any vehicle or equipment to which a national safety mark has been applied or imports any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards are prescribed shall, as provided for in the regulations, give notice of any defect in the design, manufacture or functioning of the vehicle or equipment that affects or is likely to affect the safety of any person to








(a) the Minister, on becoming aware of the defect; and








(b) the current owner and any other prescribed person, within the period provided for in the regulations.









10. (1) L’entreprise qui appose une marque nationale de sécurité sur des matériels, qui vend des matériels sur lesquels est apposée une telle marque ou qui importe des matériels d’une catégorie assujettie à des normes réglementaires, et qui constate un défaut de conception, de fabrication ou de fonctionnement qui porte atteinte ou est susceptible de porter atteinte à la sécurité humaine est tenu d’en donner avis, conformément aux règlements, au ministre, dès qu’elle en constate l’existence, ainsi qu’au propriétaire actuel et à toute personne visée par règlement, dans le délai prévu par règlement.



Avis de défaut










Notice already given



(2) A company is not required to give notice of a defect








(a) for which notice has already been given by another company that manufactured, sold or imported the vehicle or equipment; or








(b) for which a notice of non-compliance has been given under section 10.1.









(2) L’entreprise n’est pas tenue de donner l’avis si, relativement au même défaut :



Avis déjà donné




a) un avis de défaut a déjà été donné par une autre entreprise qui a fabriqué, vendu ou importé les matériels;








b) un avis de non-conformité a déjà été donné en application de l’article 10.1.














Subsequent notice



(2.1) If the Minister determines that a defect has not been corrected in an adequate number of vehicles or equipment for which notice was given under subsection (1), the Minister may, by order, require the company to provide, in accordance with any conditions specified in the order, a subsequent notice to those persons who have not had the defect corrected. In making this determination, the Minister shall take into consideration, among other things,








(a) the nature of the defect;








(b) the safety risk arising from it; and








(c) the total number of vehicles or equipment affected.









(2.1) S’il estime, compte tenu notamment de la nature du défaut, du risque en découlant ou du nombre de matériels touchés, qu’un nombre insuffisant de matériels visés par l’avis donné en application du paragraphe (1) a fait l’objet de mesures correctives, le ministre peut, par arrêté, ordonner à l’entreprise de donner, aux conditions qui y sont précisées, un avis subséquent aux personnes dont les matériels n’ont pas fait l’objet de mesures correctives.



Avis subséquent










Unknown owner



(3) If the Minister is satisfied that the current owner of a vehicle or equipment cannot reasonably be determined by a company,








(a) the company shall give notice in any other manner that is acceptable to the Minister; or








(b) the Minister may exempt the company from the requirement to give notice to the current owner.









(3) Le ministre peut, s’il est convaincu qu’il serait trop difficile pour l’entreprise d’identifier le propriétaire actuel des matériels, prévoir que celui-ci soit avisé de toute autre manière jugée acceptable par le ministre ou exempter l’entreprise de l’obligation d’aviser le propriétaire actuel.



Propriétaire inconnu










Power to order



(4) The Minister may, by order, require any company that applies a national safety mark to any vehicle or equipment, sells any vehicle or equipment to which a national safety mark has been applied or imports any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards are prescribed to give notice of a defect in the manner specified in the order, if the Minister considers that it is in the interest of safety.









(4) Le ministre peut, par arrêté, ordonner à toute entreprise qui appose une marque nationale de sécurité sur des matériels, qui vend des matériels sur lesquels est apposée une telle marque ou qui importe des matériels d’une catégorie assujettie à des normes réglementaires de donner, de la manière qui y est précisée, un avis de défaut s’il est d’avis que des raisons de sécurité le justifient.



Pourvoir d’ordonner










Statutory Instruments Act



(4.1) The Statutory Instruments Act does not apply to an order made under subsection (2.1) or (4).









(4.1) La Loi sur les textes réglementaires ne s’applique pas à un arrêté pris au titre des paragraphes (2.1) ou (4).



Loi sur les textes réglementaires












(2) Subsections 10(6) and (7) of the Act are repealed.









(2) Les paragraphes 10(6) et (7) de la même loi sont abrogés.














222. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 10:









222. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 10, de ce qui suit :












Notice of non-compliance



10.1 (1) A company that applies a national safety mark to any vehicle or equipment, sells any vehicle or equipment to which a national safety mark has been applied or imports any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards are prescribed shall, as provided for in the regulations, give notice of any non-compliance of the vehicle or equipment with the regulations to








(a) the Minister, on becoming aware of the non-compliance; and








(b) the current owner and any other prescribed person, within the period provided for in the regulations.









10.1 (1) L’entreprise qui appose une marque nationale de sécurité sur des matériels, qui vend des matériels sur lesquels est apposée une telle marque ou qui importe des matériels d’une catégorie assujettie à des normes réglementaires, et qui constate que ces matériels ne sont pas conformes aux règlements est tenue d’en donner avis, conformément aux règlements, au ministre, dès qu’elle en constate l’existence, ainsi qu’au propriétaire actuel et à toute personne visée par règlement, dans le délai prévu par règlement.



Avis de non-conformité










Notice already given



(2) A company is not required to give notice of any non-compliance for which notice has already been given by another company that manufactured, sold or imported the vehicle or equipment.









(2) L’entreprise n’est pas tenue de donner un avis de non-conformité si un tel avis a déjà été donné par une autre entreprise qui a fabriqué, vendu ou importé les matériels.



Avis déjà donné










Exception



(3) If the Minister determines that the non-compliance is inconsequential to safety, the company is not required to give notice under paragraph (1)(b).









(3) Si le ministre est convaincu que la non-conformité constatée par l’entreprise n’a aucune conséquence sur la sécurité, l’avis visé au paragraphe (1) n’est donné qu’à celui-ci.



Exception










Subsequent notice



(4) If the Minister determines that a non-compliance has not been corrected in an adequate number of vehicles or equipment, the Minister may, by order, require a company to provide, in accordance with any conditions specified in the order, a subsequent notice to those persons who have not had the non-compliance corrected. In making this determination, the Minister shall take into consideration, among other things,








(a) the nature of the non-compliance;








(b) the safety risk arising from it; and








(c) the total number of vehicles or equipment affected.









(4) S’il estime, compte tenu notamment de la nature de la non-conformité, du risque en découlant ou du nombre de matériels touchés, qu’un nombre insuffisant de matériels visés par l’avis donné en application du paragraphe (1) a fait l’objet de mesures correctives, le ministre peut, par arrêté, ordonner à l’entreprise de donner, aux conditions qui y sont précisées, un avis subséquent aux personnes dont les matériels n’ont pas fait l’objet de mesures correctives.



Avis subséquent










Unknown owner



(5) If the Minister is satisfied that the current owner of a vehicle or equipment cannot reasonably be determined by a company








(a) the company shall give notice in any other manner that is acceptable to the Minister; or








(b) the Minister may exempt the company from the requirement to give notice to the current owner.









(5) Le ministre peut, s’il est convaincu qu’il serait trop difficile pour l’entreprise d’identifier le propriétaire actuel des matériels, prévoir que celui-ci soit avisé de toute autre manière jugée acceptable par le ministre ou exempter l’entreprise de l’obligation d’aviser le propriétaire actuel.



Propriétaire inconnu










Particulars to provincial authorities



(6) On receiving a notice under subsection (1), the Minister shall forward full particulars of it to the minister or other officer who is responsible for motor vehicle administration in each province.









(6) Dès réception de l’avis prévu au paragraphe (1), le ministre en transmet la teneur au responsable du secteur des véhicules automobiles dans chaque administration provinciale.



Information aux autorités provinciales










Power to order



(7) The Minister may, by order, require any company that applies a national safety mark to any vehicle or equipment, sells any vehicle or equipment to which a national safety mark has been applied or imports any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards are prescribed to give a notice of non-compliance in the manner specified by the Minister, if the Minister considers that it is in the interest of safety.









(7) Le ministre peut, par arrêté, ordonner à toute entreprise qui appose une marque nationale de sécurité sur des matériels, qui vend des matériels sur lesquels est apposée une telle marque ou importe des matériels d’une catégorie assujettie à des normes réglementaires de donner, de la manière qui y est précisée, un avis de non-conformité s’il est d’avis que des raisons de sécurité le justifient.



Pouvoir d’ordonner










Statutory Instruments Act



(8) The Statutory Instruments Act does not apply to an order made under subsection (4) or (7).









(8) La Loi sur les textes réglementaires ne s’applique pas à un arrêté pris au titre des paragraphes (4) ou (7).



Loi sur les textes réglementaires










Follow-up reports



10.2 A company that gives notice to the Minister shall submit reports to the Minister as provided for in the regulations.









10.2 L’entreprise qui donne un avis au ministre doit lui faire rapport conformément aux règlements.



Suivi










Make information available



10.3 A company that gives notice to the Minister in respect of a vehicle shall, as provided for in regulations, make information available for the vehicle in respect of which the notice was given.









10.3 L’entreprise qui donne au ministre un avis relativement à un véhicule doit rendre accessibles, conformément aux règlements, les renseignements relatifs au véhicule visé par l’avis.



Accessibilité des renseignements












223. (1) Subsection 11(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









223. (1) Le paragraphe 11(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Regulations



11. (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act, including regulations








(a) respecting the keeping of records and the provision of information to the Minister; and








(b) prescribing or providing for anything that by this Act is to be prescribed or provided for by the regulations.









11. (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, prendre toute mesure d’application de la présente loi, notamment :



Règlements




a) régir toute question concernant la tenue de dossiers et la communication de renseignements au ministre;








b) prendre toute autre mesure d’ordre réglementaire prévue par la présente loi.
















(2) Subsections 11(3) and (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les paragraphes 11(3) et (4) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Incorporation by reference



(3) Regulations made under this section may, in whole or in part, incorporate by reference, as it is amended from time to time or as it exists on a particular date,








(a) a document produced by a person or body other than the Minister; or








(b) a technical or explanatory document produced by the Minister including specifications, classifications, illustrations, graphs, test methods, procedures, operational standards and performance standards.









(3) Les règlements pris en vertu du présent article peuvent incorporer par renvoi soit dans sa version à une date donnée, soit avec ses modifications successives :



Incorporation par renvoi




a) tout ou partie d’un document produit par une personne ou un organisme autre que le ministre;








b) tout ou partie d’un document technique ou explicatif, notamment des spécifications, des classifications, des illustrations, des graphiques, des méthodes d’essai, des procédures ou des normes d’exploitation ou de rendement, produit par le ministre.














No registration or publication



(4) For greater certainty, a document that is incorporated by reference in a regulation is not required to be transmitted for registration or published in the Canada Gazette under the Statutory Instruments Act by reason only that it is incorporated by reference.









(4) Il est entendu que les documents qui sont incorporés par renvoi dans un règlement n’ont pas à être transmis pour enregistrement ni à être publiés dans la Gazette du Canada en application de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires du seul fait de leur incorporation.



Ni enregistrement ni publication












224. Section 12 of the Act is replaced by the following:









224. L’article 12 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Definition of “technical standards document”



12.  (1) In this section, “technical standards document” means a document that is published by the Minister, as provided for in the regulations, that adapts, or that reproduces in whole or in part in the official languages of Canada, an enactment of a foreign government or material produced by an international organization. The adaptations may include amendments to the content of the originating enactment or material.









12. (1) Au présent article, « document de normes techniques » s’entend d’un document, publié par le ministre conformément aux règlements, qui reproduit en tout ou en partie, dans les deux langues officielles du Canada, ou qui l’adapte, un texte édicté par un gouvernement étranger ou un document produit par un organisme international. L’adaptation du texte ou du document d’origine se fait notamment par modification de son contenu.



Définition de « document de normes techniques »










Incorporation of document



(2) Regulations made under this Act may, in whole or in part, incorporate by reference a technical standards document as it is amended from time to time or as it exists on a particular date.









(2) Les règlements pris au titre de la présente loi peuvent incorporer par renvoi tout ou partie d’un document de normes techniques soit dans sa version à une date donnée, soit avec ses modifications successives.



Incorporation d’un document










No registration or publication



(3) For greater certainty, a technical stand-ards document that is incorporated by reference in a regulation is not required to be transmitted for registration or published in the Canada Gazette under the Statutory Instruments Act by reason only that it is incorporated by reference.









(3) Il est entendu que les documents de normes techniques qui sont incorporés par renvoi dans un règlement n’ont pas à être transmis pour enregistrement ni à être publiés dans la Gazette du Canada en application de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires du seul fait de leur incorporation.



Ni enregistrement ni publication










For greater certainty



12.1 For greater certainty, subsections 11(3) and 12(2) do not limit any authority to make regulations incorporating material by reference that exists apart from those subsections.









12.1 Il est entendu que les paragraphes 11(3) et 12(2) n’ont pas pour effet d’empêcher la prise de règlements incorporant par renvoi des documents autres que ceux visés par ces paragraphes.



Précision












225. Section 14 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









225. L’article 14 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Testimony — civil suits



(3) An inspector may not be compelled to give testimony in any civil suit, with regard to information obtained by them in the discharge of their duties, without the Minister’s written permission.









(3) L’inspecteur ne peut être contraint sans l’autorisation écrite du ministre à témoigner dans une action civile relativement à des renseignements qu’il a obtenus dans l’exercice de ses fonctions.



Non-contraignabilité












226. Paragraph 15(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









226. L’alinéa 15(1)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) any vehicle or equipment of a class for which standards have been prescribed that is owned by, or is on the premises of, a company or a consignee of imported vehicles or imported equipment;









a) de matériels appartenant à une catégorie assujettie à des normes réglementaires et qui sont la propriété ou se trouvent dans les locaux d’une entreprise ou d’un consignataire de matériels importés;












2011, c. 24, s. 186



227. Subsections 17(1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:









227. Les paragraphes 17(1) et (2) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2011, ch. 24, art. 186










Offence and punishment



17. (1) Every corporation or company that contravenes this Act, the regulations or an order








(a) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to a fine of not more than $200,000; or








(b) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to a fine of not more than $2 million.









17. (1) Toute personne morale ou entreprise qui contrevient à la présente loi ou ses règlements ou à un arrêté commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infractions et peines




a) par procédure sommaire, une amende maximale de deux cent mille dollars;








b) par mise en accusation, une amende maximale de deux millions de dollars.














Offence and punishment



(2) Every individual who contravenes this Act, the regulations or an order








(a) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to a fine of not more than $4,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than six months, or to both; or








(b) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to a fine of not more than $20,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than two years, or to both.









(2) Toute personne physique qui contrevient à la présente loi ou ses règlements ou à un arrêté commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infractions et peines




a) par procédure sommaire, une amende maximale de quatre mille dollars et un emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou l’une de ces peines;








b) par mise en accusation, une amende maximale de vingt mille dollars et un emprisonnement maximal de deux ans, ou l’une de ces peines.
















228. The heading before section 20 of the Act is replaced by the following:









228. L’intertitre précédant l’article 20 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












RESEARCH, ANALYSIS, TESTING AND FEES









RECHERCHES, EXAMENS, TESTS ET DROITS














229. (1) Paragraph 20(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









229. (1) L’alinéa 20(1)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) conduct any research, studies, evaluations and analyses that the Minister considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Act;









a) mener les recherches, enquêtes, évaluations et examens qu’il estime nécessaires à l’application de la présente loi;














(2) Subsection 20(1) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (d) and by replacing paragraph (e) with the following:









(2) L’alinéa 20(1)e) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(e) collect any information related to vehicles or equipment that the Minister considers to be in the public interest; and






(f) publish or otherwise disseminate any information, other than personal information, relating to the activities of the Minister under this section.









e) recueillir les renseignements relatifs aux matériels qu’il estime d’intérêt public;






f) diffuser, notamment en les publiant, les renseignements, à l’exception des renseignements personnels, relatifs à celles de ses activités qui sont visées au présent article.














(3) Section 20 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









(3) L’article 20 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Personal information



(1.1) For the purposes of paragraphs (1)(a), (b) and (e), the Minister may collect personal information, as defined in section 3 of the Privacy Act, including personal information from third parties.









(1.1) Le ministre peut recueillir, notamment d’un tiers, des renseignements personnels, au sens de l’article 3 de la Loi sur la protection des renseignements personnels, dans le cadre des activités visées aux alinéas (1)a), b) et e).



Renseignements personnels












230. Schedule II to the Act is repealed.









230. L’annexe II de la même loi est abrogée.










R.S., c. 32 (4th Supp.)



Railway Safety Act









Loi sur la sécurité ferroviaire



L.R., ch. 32 (4e suppl.)










2012, c. 19, s. 485



231. Section 50 of the Railway Safety Act and the heading before it are repealed.









231. L’article 50 de la Loi sur la sécurité ferroviaire et l’intertitre qui le précède sont abrogés.



2012, ch. 19, art. 485








1992, c. 34



Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act, 1992









Loi de 1992 sur le transport des marchandises dangereuses



1992, ch. 34










2009, c. 9, ss. 29(1) and (2)(F)



232. Subsections 30(1) and (2) of the Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act, 1992 are repealed.









232. Les paragraphes 30(1) et (2) de la Loi de 1992 sur le transport des marchandises dangereuses sont abrogés.



2009, ch. 9, par. 29(1) et (2)(F)








2011, c. 1



Ensuring Safe Vehicles Imported From Mexico For Canadians Act









Loi assurant aux Canadiens la sécurité des véhicules importés du Mexique



2011, ch.1












233. Sections 2 and 3 of the Ensuring Safe Vehicles Imported from Mexico for Canadians Act are repealed.









233. Les articles 2 et 3 de la Loi assurant aux Canadiens la sécurité des véhicules importés du Mexique sont abrogés.










2012, c. 24



Safe Food for Canadians Act









Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada



2012, ch. 24












234. (1) Subsection 51(1) of the Safe Food for Canadians Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (e):









234. (1) Le paragraphe 51(1) de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :














(e.1) respecting or prohibiting the purchasing or receiving of any fresh fruit or vegetable that is imported or that is sent or conveyed from one province to another;









e.1) régir ou interdire l’achat ou la réception de fruits ou de légumes frais expédiés ou transportés, d’une province à une autre, ou importés;














(2) Section 51 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(2) L’article 51 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Paragraphs (1)(d) to (e.1)



(2.1) Regulations made under paragraph (1)(d), (e) or (e.1) in respect of any fresh fruit or vegetable may, among other things, require a person to be a member of an entity or organization specified in the regulations.









(2.1) Les règlements pris en vertu des alinéas (1)d), e) ou e.1) à l’égard des fruits ou des légumes frais peuvent notamment exiger qu’une personne soit membre d’une entité ou d’un organisme désignés par règlement.



Alinéas (1)d) à e.1)












235. The headings before section 60 and sections 60 to 67 of the Act are repealed.









235. Les intertitres précédant l’article 60 de la même loi et les articles 60 à 67 sont abrogés.














236. Section 86 of the Act is replaced by the following:









236. L’article 86 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












1990, c. 8, s. 8



86. (1) Paragraph 28(1)(a) of the Federal Courts Act is repealed.









86. (1) L’alinéa 28(1)a) de la Loi sur les Cours fédérales est abrogé.



1990, ch. 8, art. 8










1990, c. 8, s. 8



(2) Paragraph 28(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 28(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1990, ch. 8, art. 8












(b) the Review Tribunal continued by subsection 27(1) of the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary Penalties Act;









b) la commission de révision prorogée par le paragraphe 27(1) de la Loi sur les sanctions administratives pécuniaires en matière d’agriculture et d’agroalimentaire;












Coordinating Amendments









Dispositions de coordination












2012, c. 24



237. (1) In this section, “other Act” means the Safe Food for Canadians Act.









237. (1) Au présent article, « autre loi » s’entend de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada.



2012, ch. 24












(2) If section 86 of the other Act comes into force before section 236 of this Act, then on the day on which that section 236 comes into force, paragraph 28(1)(a) of the Federal Courts Act is repealed.









(2) Si l’article 86 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 236 de la présente loi, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de cet article 236, l’alinéa 28(1)a) de la Loi sur les cours fédérales est abrogé.














(3) If section 236 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 86 of the other Act, then that section 236 is deemed to have come into force before that section 86.









(3) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 236 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 86 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 236 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 86.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



238. Section 213, subsections 217(1), (3), (4) and (6) and sections 220 to 222 and 230 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









238. L’article 213, les paragraphes 217(1), (3), (4) et (6) et les articles 220 à 222 et 230 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












Division 16









Section 16










1993, c. 38



Telecommunications Act









Loi sur les télécommunications



1993, ch. 38










Amendments to the Act









Modification de la loi














239. (1) Subsection 27(3) of the Telecommunications Act is replaced by the following:









239. (1) Le paragraphe 27(3) de la Loi sur les télécommunications est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Questions of fact



(3) The Commission may determine in any case, as a question of fact, whether a Canadian carrier has complied with this section or section 25, 27.1 or 29, or with any decision made under section 24, 25, 29, 34 or 40.









(3) Le Conseil peut déterminer, comme question de fait, si l’entreprise canadienne s’est ou non conformée aux dispositions du présent article ou des articles 25, 27.1 ou 29 ou à toute décision prise au titre des articles 24, 25, 29, 34 ou 40.



Questions de fait












(2) Subsection 27(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 27(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Questions of fact



(3) The Commission may determine in any case, as a question of fact, whether a Canadian carrier has complied with this section or section 25 or 29, or with any decision made under section 24, 25, 29, 34 or 40.









(3) Le Conseil peut déterminer, comme question de fait, si l’entreprise canadienne s’est ou non conformée aux dispositions du présent article ou des articles 25 ou 29 ou à toute décision prise au titre des articles 24, 25, 29, 34 ou 40.



Questions de fait












240. (1) The Act is amended by adding the following after section 27:









240. (1) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 27, de ce qui suit :












Roaming









Itinérance












Roaming cap — wireless voice calls



27.1 (1) The amount charged during a year by a Canadian carrier to a second Canadian carrier for roaming services with respect to the transmission of all domestic wireless voice calls and the domestic portion of all international wireless voice calls shall not exceed the amount determined by the formula








A/B








where








A      is the first Canadian carrier’s total retail revenues from the provision of wireless voice call services to its Canadian subscrib-ers, for calls both originating and terminating in Canada, for the preceding year; and








B      is the number of minutes provided for those calls for the preceding year.









27.1 (1) La somme exigée au cours d’une année par une entreprise canadienne d’une autre entreprise canadienne pour des services d’itinérance relatifs à la transmission des communications vocales sans fil nationales et aux portions nationales des communications vocales sans fil internationales ne peut excéder le plafond correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Plafond — appels  vocaux sans fil




A/B








où :








A      représente les revenus de détail totaux de cette première entreprise canadienne pour l’année précédente pour la fourniture de services de communications vocales sans fil ayant, à la fois, un point d’origine et un point d’arrivée au Canada à ses abonnés canadiens;








B      le nombre de minutes allouées pour ces appels pour l’année précédente.














Roaming cap — wireless data



(2) The amount charged during a year by a Canadian carrier to a second Canadian carrier for roaming services with respect to the transmission of wireless data in Canada shall not exceed the amount determined by the formula








A/B








where








A      is the first Canadian carrier’s total retail revenues from the provision of wireless data services in Canada to its Canadian subscrib-ers for the preceding year; and








B      is the number of megabytes provided for those data services for the preceding year.









(2) La somme exigée au cours d’une année par une entreprise canadienne d’une autre entreprise canadienne pour des services d’itinérance relatifs à la transmission au Canada de données sans fil ne peut excéder le plafond correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Plafond — données sans fil




A/B








où :








A      représente les revenus de détail totaux de cette première entreprise canadienne pour l’année précédente pour la fourniture de services de transmission de données sans fil au Canada à ses abonnés canadiens;








B      le nombre de mega-octets alloués pour ces services de transmission de données pour l’année précédente.














Roaming cap — text messages



(3) The amount charged during a year by a Canadian carrier to a second Canadian carrier for roaming services with respect to the transmission of all domestic wireless text messages and the domestic portion of all international wireless text messages shall not exceed the amount determined by the formula








A/B








where








A      is the first Canadian carrier’s total retail revenues from the provision of wireless text message services to its Canadian subscribers, for text messages both originating and terminating in Canada, for the preceding year; and








B      is the number of those text messages for the preceding year.









(3) La somme exigée au cours d’une année par une entreprise canadienne d’une autre entreprise canadienne pour des services d’itinérance relatifs à la transmission de messages texte sans fil nationaux et aux portions nationales des messages texte sans fil internationaux ne peut excéder le plafond correspondant au résultat du calcul suivant :



Plafond — messages texte




A/B








où :








A      représente les revenus de détail totaux de cette première entreprise canadienne pour l’année précédente pour la fourniture de services de messages texte sans fil ayant, à la fois, un point d’origine et un point d’arrivée au Canada à ses abonnés canadiens;








B      le nombre de ces messages texte pour l’année précédente.














No additional charge



(4) The Canadian carrier shall not charge the second Canadian carrier any other amount in relation to the provision of the roaming services referred to in subsections (1) to (3).









(4) L’entreprise canadienne ne peut exiger de l’autre entreprise canadienne le versement de quelque autre somme en lien avec les services d’itinérance visés aux paragraphes (1) à (3).



Autres droits










Inconsistency



(5) The amount established by the Commission that a Canadian carrier can charge to a second Canadian carrier for roaming services prevails over an amount determined under any of subsections (1) to (3) to the extent of any inconsistency.









(5) En cas d’incompatibilité entre la somme, établie par le Conseil, que peut exiger une entreprise canadienne d’une autre entreprise canadienne pour des services d’itinérance et toute somme déterminée au titre de l’un ou l’autre des paragraphes (1) à (3), la somme établie par le Conseil l’emporte.



Incompatibilité












(2) Section 27.1 of the Act is repealed.









(2) L’article 27.1 de la même loi est abrogé.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



241. Subsections 239(2) and 240(2) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









241. Les paragraphes 239(2) et 240(2) entrent en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret












Division 17









Section 17












Sickness Benefits









Prestations de maladie










R.S., c. L-2



Canada Labour Code









Code canadien du travail



L.R., ch. L-2










2003, c. 15, s. 27



242. Subsection 206.3(6) of the Canada Labour Code is repealed.









242. Le paragraphe 206.3(6) du Code canadien du travail est abrogé.



2003, ch. 15, art. 27












243. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 207:









243. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 207, de ce qui suit :












Minimum periods of leave



207.01 Subject to the regulations, a leave of absence under any of sections 206.3 to 206.5 may only be taken in one or more periods of not less than one week’s duration.









207.01 Sous réserve des règlements, le droit au congé visé à l’un des articles 206.3 à 206.5 peut être exercé en une ou plusieurs périodes d’une durée minimale d’une semaine chacune.



Durée minimale d’une période










Interruption



207.02 (1) An employee may interrupt a leave of absence referred to in any of sections 206.3 to 206.5 in order to be absent due to a reason referred to in subsection 239(1) or 239.1(1).









207.02 (1) L’employé peut interrompre l’un des congés prévus aux articles 206.3 à 206.5 afin de s’absenter pour l’une des raisons mentionnées aux paragraphes 239(1) ou 239.1(1).



Interruption










Resumption



(2) The interrupted leave resumes immediately after the interruption ends.









(2) Le congé interrompu se poursuit dès que l’interruption prend fin.



Reprise










Exception — sick leave



(3) Except to the extent that it is inconsistent with subsection 239(1.1), section 209.1 applies to an employee who interrupted the leave in order to be absent due to a reason referred to in subsection 239(1).









(3) Sauf dans la mesure où il est incompatible avec le paragraphe 239(1.1), l’article 209.1 s’applique à l’employé qui a interrompu le congé afin de s’absenter pour l’une des raisons mentionnées au paragraphe 239(1).



Exception —congé de maladie










Exception — work-related illness or injury



(4) Except to the extent that it is inconsistent with subsections 239.1(3) and (4), section 209.1 applies to an employee who interrupted the leave in order to be absent due to a reason referred to in subsection 239.1(1).









(4) Sauf dans la mesure où il est incompatible avec les paragraphes 239.1(3) et (4), l’article 209.1 s’applique à l’employé qui a interrompu le congé afin de s’absenter pour l’une des raisons mentionnées au paragraphe 239.1(1).



Exception —accidents et maladies professionnels










2012, c. 27, s. 7



244. Section 207.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









244. L’article 207.1 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, art. 7










Notice to employer — interruption of leave



207.1 (1) An employee who intends to interrupt their leave under subsection 206.1(2.4) or 207.02(1) shall provide the employer with a notice in writing of the interruption before or as soon as possible after it begins.









207.1 (1) L’employé qui entend interrompre son congé en vertu des paragraphes 206.1(2.4) ou 207.02(1) en informe l’employeur par écrit avant l’interruption ou dès que possible après le début de celle-ci.



Avis à l’employeur— interruption du congé










Notice to employer — resumption of leave



(2) The employee shall provide the employer with a notice in writing of the day on which they resume their leave before or as soon as possible after that day.









(2) L’employé informe l’employeur par écrit de la date à laquelle il poursuit son congé avant cette date ou dès que possible après celle-ci.



Avis à l’employeur —poursuite du congé










2012, c. 27, s. 8



245. (1) Subsection 207.3(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









245. (1) Le paragraphe 207.3(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, art. 8










Notice to employer of leave



207.3 (1) Every employee who takes a leave of absence from employment under any of sections 206.3 to 206.5 shall, as soon as possible, provide the employer with a notice in writing of the reasons for the leave and the length of the leave that they intend to take.









207.3 (1) L’employé qui prend l’un des congés prévus aux articles 206.3 à 206.5 informe dès que possible l’employeur par écrit des raisons et de la durée du congé qu’il entend prendre.



Avis à l’employeur










2012, c. 27, s. 8



(2) Subsection 207.3(2) of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 207.3(2) de la version anglaise de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, art. 8










Notice of change in length of leave



(2) Every employee who is on a leave of absence from employment under any of sections 206.3 to 206.5 shall, as soon as possible, provide the employer with a notice in writing of any change in the length of the leave that they intend to take.









(2) Every employee who is on a leave of absence from employment under any of sections 206.3 to 206.5 shall, as soon as possible, provide the employer with a notice in writing of any change in the length of the leave that they intend to take.



Notice of change in length of leave










2012, c. 27, s. 8



(3) Subsections 207.3(3) to (5) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(3) Les paragraphes 207.3(3) à (5) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, art. 8










Leave of more than four weeks



(3) If the length of the leave taken under section 206.4 or 206.5 is more than four weeks, the notice in writing of any change in the length of the leave shall be provided on at least four weeks’ notice, unless there is a valid reason why that cannot be done.









(3) Sauf exception valable, le préavis doit être d’au moins quatre semaines si le congé pris en vertu des articles 206.4 ou 206.5 est de plus de quatre semaines.



Délai pour préavis










Documentation



(4) The employer may require the employee to provide documentation in support of the reasons for the leave taken under section 206.4 or 206.5 and of any change in the length of leave that the employee intends to take.









(4) L’employeur peut exiger de l’employé qu’il fournisse des documents justificatifs concernant les raisons du congé pris en vertu des articles 206.4 ou 206.5 ou la modification de sa durée.



Documents










Return to work postponed



(5) If an employee who takes a leave of more than four weeks under section 206.4 or 206.5 wishes to shorten the length of the leave but does not provide the employer with four weeks’ notice, then the employer may postpone the employee’s return to work for a period of up to four weeks after the day on which the employee informs the employer of the new end date of the leave. If the employer informs the employee that their return to work is postponed, the employee is not entitled to return to work until the day that is indicated by the employer.









(5) Si l’employé qui a pris un congé en vertu des articles 206.4 ou 206.5 de plus de quatre semaines désire en raccourcir la durée mais omet de fournir le préavis exigé au paragraphe (3), l’employeur peut retarder le retour au travail d’une période d’au plus quatre semaines suivant le jour où l’employé l’informe de la nouvelle date de la fin du congé. Si l’employeur avise l’employé que le retour au travail est retardé, l’employé ne peut retourner au travail avant la date précisée.



Report de la date de retour au travail












246. Section 209.4 of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (a.1):









246. L’article 209.4 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa a.1), de ce qui suit :














(a.2) prescribing the maximum number of periods of leave of absence that an employee may take under any of sections 206.3 to 206.5;









a.2) préciser le nombre maximal de périodes de congé que peut prendre un employé en vertu de l’un des articles 206.3 à 206.5;










1996, c. 23



Employment Insurance Act









Loi sur l’assurance-emploi



1996, ch. 23










2012, c. 27, s. 15



247. Subsection 18(2) of the Employment Insurance Act is replaced by the following:









247. Le paragraphe 18(2) de la Loi sur l’assurance-emploi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, art. 15










Exception



(2) A claimant to whom benefits are payable under any of sections 23 to 23.2 is not disentitled under paragraph (1)(b) for failing to prove that he or she would have been available for work were it not for the illness, injury or quarantine.









(2) Le prestataire à qui des prestations doivent être payées en vertu de l’un des articles 23 à 23.2 n’est pas inadmissible au titre de l’alinéa (1)b) parce qu’il ne peut prouver qu’il aurait été disponible pour travailler n’eût été la maladie, la blessure ou la mise en quarantaine.



Exception










2012, c. 27, s. 21(1)



248. Subsection 152.03(1.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









248. Le paragraphe 152.03(1.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 27, par. 21(1)










Exception



(1.1) A self-employed person to whom benefits are payable under any of sections 152.05 to 152.061 is entitled to benefits under subsection (1) even though the person did not cease to work as a self-employed person because of a prescribed illness, injury or quarantine and would not be working even without the illness, injury or quarantine.









(1.1) Le travailleur indépendant à qui des prestations doivent être payées en vertu de l’un des articles 152.05 à 152.061 est admissible aux prestations visées au paragraphe (1) même s’il n’a pas cessé de travailler à ce titre par suite d’une maladie, d’une blessure ou d’une mise en quarantaine prévues par règlement et n’aurait pas travaillé même en l’absence de maladie, de blessure ou de mise en quarantaine.



Exception












249. Subsection 152.09(2) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (c), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (d) and by adding the following after paragraph (d):









249. Le paragraphe 152.09(2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa d), de ce qui suit :














(e) providing care or support to one or more critically ill children of the self-employed person.









e) soins ou soutien à donner par le travailleur indépendant à un ou plusieurs de ses enfants gravement malades.












Transitional Provision









Disposition transitoire












Illness, injury or quarantine



250. Subsections 18(2) and 152.03(1.1) of the Employment Insurance Act, as enacted by sections 247 and 248, apply only to claims for benefits because of illness, injury or quarantine that are made for weeks that begin on or after the day on which sections 247 and 248 come into force.









250. Les paragraphes 18(2) et 152.03(1.1) de la Loi sur l’assurance-emploi, édictés par les articles 247 et 248, ne s’appliquent qu’aux demandes de prestations par suite d’une maladie, d’une blessure ou d’une mise en quarantaine qui visent des semaines commençant à la date d’entrée en vigueur des articles 247 et 248 ou après cette date.



Maladie, blessure ou mise en quarantaine










Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



251. This Division, other than section 249, comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









251. La présente section, à l’exception de l’article 249, entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret












Division 18









Section 18










1997, c. 6



Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act









Loi sur l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments



1997, ch. 6










Amendment to the Act









Modification de la loi














252. The Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act is amended by adding the following after section 25:









252. La Loi sur l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 25, de ce qui suit :












User Fees Act



25.1 The User Fees Act does not apply to a fee fixed under section 24 for a service or the use of a facility provided by the Agency under the Safe Food for Canadians Act or to a fee fixed under section 25 in respect of products, rights and privileges provided by the Agency under that Act.









25.1 La Loi sur les frais d’utilisation ne s’applique pas aux prix fixés dans le cadre des articles 24 ou 25 pour la fourniture de services, d’installations ou de produits ou l’attribution de droits ou d’avantages par l’Agence en vertu de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada.



Loi sur les frais d’utilisation










Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












2012, c. 24 or royal assent



253. This Division comes into force on the day on which section 103 of the Safe Food for Canadians Act comes into force or, if it is later, on the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









253. La présente section entre en vigueur à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 103 de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada ou, si elle est postérieure, à la date de sanction de la présente loi.



2012, ch. 24 ou sanction












Division 19









Section 19












Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing









Recyclage des produits de la criminalité et financement des activités terroristes










2000, c. 17; 2001, c. 41, s. 48



Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act









Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes



2000, ch.17; 2001, ch. 41, art. 48












254. The definition “officer” in section 2 of the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act is repealed.









254. La définition de « agent », à l’article 2 de la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, est abrogée.














255. Subparagraph 3(a)(iii) of the Act is replaced by the following:









255. Le sous-alinéa 3a)(iii) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(iii) establishing an agency that is responsible for ensuring compliance with Parts 1 and 1.1 and for dealing with reported and other information;









(iii) constituer un organisme chargé du contrôle d’application des parties 1 et 1.1 et de l’examen de renseignements, notamment ceux portés à son attention au titre du sous-alinéa (ii);












2006, c. 12, s. 3(1)



256. (1) Paragraph 5(g) of the Act is replaced by the following:









256. (1) L’alinéa 5g) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 3(1)












(g) persons and entities authorized under provincial legislation to engage in the business of dealing in securities or any other financial instruments or to provide portfolio management or investment advising services, other than persons who act exclusively on behalf of such an authorized person or entity;









g) les personnes et les entités autorisées en vertu de la législation provinciale à se livrer au commerce des valeurs mobilières ou d’autres instruments financiers, ou à la fourniture de services de gestion de portefeuille et de conseils en placement, à l’exception des personnes agissant exclusivement au nom de telles entités ou personnes;












2006, c. 12, s. 3(1)



(2) Paragraph 5(h) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 5h) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 3(1)












(h) persons and entities that have a place of business in Canada and that are engaged in the business of providing at least one of the following services:






(i) foreign exchange dealing,






(ii) remitting funds or transmitting funds by any means or through any person, entity or electronic funds transfer network,






(iii) issuing or redeeming money orders, traveller’s cheques or other similar negotiable instruments except for cheques payable to a named person or entity,






(iv) dealing in virtual currencies, as defined in the regulations, or






(v) any service described in regulations made under paragraph 73(1)(a);






(h.1) persons and entities that do not have a place of business in Canada, that are engaged in the business of providing at least one of the following services that is directed at persons or entities in Canada, and that provide those services to their customers in Canada:






(i) foreign exchange dealing,






(ii) remitting funds or transmitting funds by any means or through any person, entity or electronic funds transfer network,






(iii) issuing or redeeming money orders, traveller’s cheques or other similar negotiable instruments except for cheques payable to a named person or entity,






(iv) dealing in virtual currencies, as defined in the regulations, or






(v) any service described in regulations made under paragraph 73(1)(a);









h) les personnes et les entités qui ont un établissement au Canada et qui se livrent à la fourniture de l’un des services suivants :






(i) les opérations de change,






(ii) la remise de fonds ou la transmission de fonds par tout moyen ou par l’intermédiaire d’une personne, d’une entité ou d’un réseau de télévirement,






(iii) l’émission ou le rachat de mandats-poste, de chèques de voyage ou d’autres titres négociables semblables, à l’exclusion des chèques libellés au nom d’une personne ou d’une entité,






(iv) le commerce d’une monnaie virtuelle, au sens des règlements,






(v) tout service déterminé dans les règlements pris en vertu de l’alinéa 73(1)a);






h.1) les personnes et les entités qui n’ont pas d’établissement au Canada et qui se livrent à la fourniture, à l’intention de personnes ou entités se trouvant au Canada, de l’un des services ci-après et qui les fournissent aux personnes ou entités se trouvant au Canada qui consomment ces services :






(i) les opérations de change,






(ii) la remise de fonds ou la transmission de fonds par tout moyen ou par l’intermédiaire d’une personne, d’une entité ou d’un réseau de télévirement,






(iii) l’émission ou le rachat de mandats-poste, de chèques de voyage ou d’autres titres négociables semblables, à l’exclusion des chèques libellés au nom d’une personne ou d’une entité,






(iv) le commerce d’une monnaie virtuelle, au sens des règlements,






(v) tout service déterminé dans les règlements pris en vertu de l’alinéa 73(1)a);














(3) Paragraph 5(k) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 5k) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(k) the government of a province that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(a) of the Criminal Code,






(i) in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games, or






(ii) in any other permanent establishment, conducts and manages games that are operated on or through a slot machine, as defined in subsection 198(3) of the Criminal Code, or any other similar electronic gaming device, if there are more than 50 of those machines or other devices in the establishment;






(k.1) the government of a province that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, conducts and manages a lottery scheme, other than bingo or the sale of lottery tickets, that is accessible to the public through the Internet or other digital network, except if the network is an internal network within an establishment described in subparagraph (k)(ii);






(k.2) an organization that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(b) of the Criminal Code, in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games, unless the organization is a registered charity, as defined in subsection 248(1) of the Income Tax Act, and the lottery scheme is conducted or managed for a period of not more than two consecutive days at a time;






(k.3) the board of a fair or of an exhibition, or the operator of a concession leased by such a board, that, in accordance with paragraph 207(1)(c) of the Criminal Code, in a permanent establishment that is held out to be a casino, conducts and manages a lottery scheme that includes games of roulette or card games;









k) le gouvernement d’une province qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)a) du Code criminel :






(i) met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement permanent présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes,






(ii) met sur pied et exploite des jeux au moyen d’un appareil à sous, au sens du paragraphe 198(3) du Code criminel, ou autre dispositif de jeu électronique semblable dans tout autre établissement permanent où se trouvent plus de cinquante de ces appareils à sous ou autres dispositifs semblables;






k.1) le gouvernement d’une province qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)a) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie, à l’exclusion d’un bingo ou de la vente de billets de loterie, accessible au public par Internet ou autre réseau numérique, à l’exception d’un réseau numérique interne d’un établissement visé au sous-alinéa k)(ii);






k.2) l’organisme qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)b) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement permanent présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes, sauf dans le cas où l’organisme en question est un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré, au sens du paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu, et que la loterie est mise sur pied et exploitée pendant deux jours consécutifs ou moins à la fois;






k.3) le conseil d’une foire ou d’une exposition, ou l’exploitant d’une concession louée auprès du conseil, qui, dans le cadre de l’alinéa 207(1)c) du Code criminel, met sur pied et exploite une loterie dans un établissement permanent présenté comme étant un casino où l’on peut notamment jouer à la roulette ou à des jeux de cartes;














257. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 5:









257. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 5, de ce qui suit :












Clarification



5.1 For greater certainty, this Part does not apply to persons or entities referred to in paragraph 5(h.1) in respect of the services they provide to persons or entities outside Canada.









5.1 Il est entendu que la présente partie ne s’applique pas aux personnes et entités visées à l’alinéa 5h.1) relativement aux services qu’ils fournissent à des personnes ou entités se trouvant à l’étranger.



Précision










2006, c. 12, s. 8



258. Section 9.3 of the Act is replaced by the following:









258. L’article 9.3 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 8










Politically exposed persons



9.3 (1) Every person or entity that is referred to in section 5 and that is prescribed shall determine, in the prescribed circumstances and in accordance with the regulations, whether it is dealing with








(a) a politically exposed foreign person, a prescribed family member of a politically exposed foreign person, or a person who the person or entity knows or should reasonably know is closely associated, for personal or business reasons, with a politically exposed foreign person;








(b) a politically exposed domestic person, a prescribed family member of a politically exposed domestic person, or a person who the person or entity knows or should reasonably know is closely associated, for personal or business reasons, with a politically exposed domestic person; or








(c) the head of an international organization, a prescribed family member of the head of an international organization, or a person who the person or entity knows or should reasonably know is closely associated, for personal or business reasons, with the head of an international organization.









9.3 (1) Il incombe à toute personne ou entité mentionnée à l’article 5 et visée par règlement d’établir, dans les cas prévus par les règlements et en conformité avec ceux-ci, si elle fait affaire avec l’une des personnes suivantes :



Personnes politiquement exposées




a) un étranger politiquement vulnérable, tout membre de la famille de celui-ci visé par règlement ou une personne dont la personne ou l’entité sait ou devrait normalement savoir qu’elle est étroitement associée à cet étranger pour des raisons personnelles ou d’affaires;








b) un national politiquement vulnérable, tout membre de la famille de celle-ci visé par règlement ou une personne dont la personne ou l’entité sait ou devrait normalement savoir qu’elle est étroitement associée à ce national politiquement vulnérable pour des raisons personnelles ou d’affaires;








c) le dirigeant d’une organisation internationale, tout membre de la famille de celui-ci visé par règlement ou une personne dont la personne ou l’entité sait ou devrait normalement savoir qu’elle est étroitement associée à ce dirigeant pour des raisons personnelles ou d’affaires.














Measures — politically exposed foreign persons



(2) If the person or entity determines that it is dealing with a person described in paragraph (1)(a), the person or entity shall obtain the approval of senior management in the prescribed circumstances and take the prescribed measures.









(2) Si elle fait affaire avec une personne visée à l’alinéa (1)a), elle obtient l’agrément de la haute direction dans les cas prévus par règlement et prend les mesures réglementaires.



Mesures —étranger politiquement vulnérable










Measures — other persons



(2.1) If the person or entity determines that it is dealing with a person described in paragraph (1)(b) or (c) and considers, based on an assessment referred to in subsection 9.6(2), that the person poses a high risk of committing a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, the person or entity shall obtain the approval of senior management in the prescribed circumstances and take the prescribed measures.









(2.1) Si elle fait affaire avec une personne visée à l’un des alinéas (1)b) ou c) et qu’elle considère, en se fondant sur l’évaluation visée au paragraphe 9.6(2), que cette personne présente un risque élevé de commettre une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou une infraction de financement des activités terroristes, la personne ou l’entité obtient l’agrément de la haute direction dans les cas prévus par règlement et prend les mesures réglementaires.



Mesures — autres personnes










Definitions



(3) The following definitions apply in this section.




“head of an international organization”« dirigeant d’une organisation internationale »



“head of an international organization” means the head of an international organization that is established by the governments of states or the head of an institution of any such organization.




“politically exposed domestic person”« national politiquement vulnérable »



“politically exposed domestic person” means a person who, at a given time, holds — or has held within a prescribed period before that time — one of the offices or positions referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (j) in or on behalf of the federal government or a provincial government or the office or position referred to in paragraph (k) in a municipal government: 








(a) Governor General, lieutenant governor or head of government;








(b) member of the Senate or House of Commons or member of a legislature;








(c) deputy minister or equivalent rank;








(d) ambassador, or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador;








(e) military officer with a rank of general or above;








(f) president of a corporation that is wholly owned directly by Her Majesty in right of Canada or a province;








(g) head of a government agency;








(h) judge of an appellate court in a province, the Federal Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court of Canada;








(i) leader or president of a political party represented in a legislature;








(j) holder of any prescribed office or position; or








(k) mayor.




“politically exposed foreign person”« étranger politiquement vulnérable »



“politically exposed foreign person” means a person who holds or has held one of the following offices or positions in or on behalf of a foreign state:








(a) head of state or head of government;








(b) member of the executive council of government or member of a legislature;








(c) deputy minister or equivalent rank;








(d) ambassador, or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador;








(e) military officer with a rank of general or above;








(f) president of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank;








(g) head of a government agency;








(h) judge of a supreme court, constitutional court or other court of last resort;








(i) leader or president of a political party represented in a legislature; or








(j) holder of any prescribed office or position.









(3) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent au présent article.



Définitions




« dirigeant d’une organisation internationale » Dirigeant d’une organisation internationale créée par les gouvernements de divers États ou dirigeant d’une institution de cette organisation.



« dirigeant d’une organisation internationale »“head of an international organization”




« étranger politiquement vulnérable » Personne qui occupe ou a occupé l’une des charges ci-après au sein d’un État étranger ou pour son compte :



« étranger politiquement vulnérable »“politically exposed foreign person”




a) chef d’État ou chef de gouvernement;








b) membre du conseil exécutif de gouvernement ou membre d’une assemblée législative;








c) sous-ministre ou titulaire d’une charge de rang équivalent;








d) ambassadeur, ou attaché ou conseiller d’un ambassadeur;








e) officier ayant le rang de général ou un rang supérieur;








f) dirigeant d’une société d’État ou d’une banque d’État;








g) chef d’un organisme gouvernemental;








h) juge de la cour suprême, de la cour constitutionnelle ou d’une autre cour de dernier ressort;








i) chef ou président d’un parti politique représenté au sein d’une assemblée législative;








j) titulaire d’un poste ou d’une charge visés par règlement.








« national politiquement vulnérable » Personne qui, à un moment donné, occupe — ou a occupé au cours d’une période qui est antérieure prévue par règlement — l’une des charges prévues aux alinéas a) à j) au sein de l’administration fédérale ou provinciale ou pour le compte d’elles ou la charge prévue à l’alinéa k) :



« national politiquement vulnérable »“politically exposed domestic person”




a) gouverneur général, lieutenant gouverneur ou chef de gouvernement;








b) membre du Sénat ou de la Chambre des communes ou membre d’une assemblée législative;








c) sous-ministre ou titulaire d’une charge de rang équivalent;








d) ambassadeur, ou attaché ou conseiller d’un ambassadeur;








e) officier ayant le rang de général ou un rang supérieur;








f) dirigeant d’une société appartenant directement à cent pour cent à Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou d’une province;








g) chef d’un organisme gouvernemental;








h) juge d’une cour d’appel provinciale, de la Cour d’appel fédérale ou de la Cour suprême du Canada;








i) chef ou président d’un parti politique représenté au sein de l’assemblée législative;








j) titulaire d’un poste ou d’une charge visés par règlement;








k) maire.














Prohibition if unregistered



9.31 (1) No entity referred to in paragraph 5(a), (b), (d) or (e) and no other entity that is referred to in section 5 and that is prescribed shall open or maintain an account for, or have a correspondent banking relationship with, a person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(h.1) unless that person or entity is registered with the Centre under section 11.1.









9.31 (1) Il est interdit à toute entité visée aux alinéas 5a), b), d) et e) et à toute autre entité mentionnée à l’article 5 et visée par règlement d’ouvrir ou de maintenir un compte pour une personne ou entité visée à l’alinéa 5h.1) ou d’avoir une relation de correspondant bancaire avec cette personne ou entité, à moins que cette personne ou entité ne soit inscrite auprès du Centre en application de l’article 11.1.



Interdiction : absence d’inscription










Definition of “correspondent banking relationship”



(2) For the purposes of this section, “correspondent banking relationship” means a relationship created by an agreement or arrangement under which an entity referred to in paragraph 5(a), (b), (d) or (e) or an entity that is referred to in section 5 and that is prescribed undertakes to provide to a person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(h.1) services such as international electronic funds transfers, cash management, cheque clearing and any prescribed services.









(2) Pour l’application du présent article, « relation de correspondant bancaire » s’entend de la relation découlant de tout accord au titre duquel une entité visée aux alinéas 5a), b), d) et e) ou une autre entité mentionnée à l’article 5 et visée par règlement s’engage à fournir à une personne ou entité visée à l’alinéa 5h.1) des services tels les télévirements internationaux, la gestion de trésorerie, la compensation de chèques et tout service prévu par règlement.



Définition de « relation de correspondant bancaire »










2006, c. 12, s. 8



259. Subsection 9.4(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









259. Le paragraphe 9.4(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 8










Prohibition — shell bank



(2) No person or entity shall have a correspondent banking relationship with a shell bank as defined in the regulations.









(2) Il est interdit d’avoir une relation de correspondant bancaire avec une banque fictive au sens des règlements.



Interdiction : banque fictive










2010, c. 12, s. 1866



260. Sections 9.7 and 9.8 of the Act are replaced by the following:









260. Les articles 9.7 et 9.8 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1866










Foreign branches and subsidiaries



9.7 (1) Every entity referred to in any of paragraphs 5(a) to (g), except for authorized foreign banks within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act and for foreign companies within the meaning of section 2 of the Insurance Companies Act, shall, in respect of its foreign branches, and in respect of its foreign subsidiaries that carry out activities similar to those of entities referred to in those paragraphs and that are either wholly-owned by the entity or have financial statements that are consolidated with those of the entity, develop policies that establish requirements similar to the requirements of sections 6, 6.1 and 9.6 and ensure that those branches and subsidiaries apply those policies to the extent it is permitted by, and does not conflict with, the laws of the country in which the branch or subsidiary is located.









9.7 (1) Il incombe à toute entité visée à l’un des alinéas 5a) à g), à l’exclusion des banques étrangères autorisées, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les banques, et des sociétés étran-gères, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les so-ciétés d’assurances, d’élaborer des principes prévoyant des obligations similaires aux obligations prévues aux articles 6, 6.1 et 9.6 pour ses succursales étrangères et pour ses filiales étrangères qui exercent des activités semblables à celles des entités visées à ces alinéas et avec lesquelles ses résultats financiers sont consolidés ou qui est une filiale à cent pour cent de celle-ci et de veiller à ce que ces succursales et ces filiales les mettent en application lorsque les lois du pays où se trouve la succursale ou la filiale le permettent et que leur application n’est pas en conflit avec celles-ci.



Succursales et filiales étrangères










Board approval of policies



(2) Before the policies referred to in subsection (1) are applied, the entity’s board of directors, if there is one, shall approve them.









(2) Lorsque l’entité visée au paragraphe (1) a un conseil d’administration, celui-ci approuve les principes avant leur mise en application.



Approbation du conseil d’administration










Exceptions



(3) Subsection (1) does not apply to








(a) an entity that is a subsidiary of an entity to which that subsection applies; or








(b) an entity that is a subsidiary of a foreign entity that has developed policies that establish requirements for its subsidiaries that are similar to the requirements of sections 6, 6.1 and 9.6, if that subsidiary is applying those policies to the extent it is permitted by, and do not conflict with, the laws of Canada or a province.









(3) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas :



Exceptions




a) à une entité qui est une filiale d’une entité visée à ce paragraphe;








b) à une entité qui est une filiale d’une entité étrangère, si la filiale met en application, dans la mesure où cela est permis par les lois fédérales ou provinciales du Canada et n’entre pas en conflit avec ceux-ci, les principes qui ont été élaborés par l’entité étrangère et qui prévoient des obligations semblables à celles prévues aux articles 6, 6.1 et 9.6 pour ses filiales.














Records and reporting



(4) If the application by a foreign branch or a foreign subsidiary of a policy referred to in subsection (1) is not permitted by or would conflict with the laws of the country in which the branch or subsidiary is located, the entity shall keep and retain, in accordance with section 6, a record of that fact and of the reasons why it is not permitted or it would conflict, and shall, within a reasonable time, notify the Centre, and the principal agency or body that supervises or regulates it under federal or provincial law, of that fact and those reasons.









(4) L’entité tient et conserve, en application de l’article 6, les cas où une de ses succursales étrangères ou de ses filiales étrangères ne peut pas mettre en application un principe visé au paragraphe (1) parce que cela n’est pas permis par les lois du pays où la succursale étrangère ou la filiale étrangère se trouve ou entrerait en conflit avec les lois de ce pays, motifs à l’appui, et les signale au Centre et à l’autorité ou à l’organisme principal de surveillance ou de réglementation dont elle relève sous le régime d’une loi fédérale ou provinciale dans un délai raisonnable.



Tenue de documents










Information exchange between affiliated entities



9.8 (1) Every entity referred to in any of paragraphs 5(a) to (g) that is affiliated with an entity referred to in those paragraphs or with a foreign entity that carries out activities similar to those of entities referred to in those paragraphs shall develop and apply policies and procedures related to the exchange of information between the entity and those affiliated entities for the purpose of detecting or deterring a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financ-ing offence or of assessing the risk of such an offence.









9.8 (1) Il incombe à toute entité visée à l’un des alinéas 5a) à g) du même groupe qu’une autre entité visée à ces alinéas ou qu’une entité étrangère qui exerce des activités semblables à celles des entités visées à ces alinéas d’élaborer et de mettre en application des principes et des mesures liés au partage de renseignements, entre elle et cette autre entité ou entité étrangère du même groupe, des renseignements en vue de détecter les infractions de recyclage des produits de la criminalité et les infractions de financement des activités terroristes, d’en décourager la perpétration ou d’en évaluer les risques.



Partage de renseignements entre entités du même groupe










Affiliation



(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an entity is affiliated with another entity if one of them is wholly owned by the other, if both are wholly owned by the same entity or if their financial statements are consolidated.









(2) Pour l’application du paragraphe (1), sont du même groupe les entités dont l’une est entièrement propriétaire de l’autre, celles qui sont entièrement la propriété de la même entité ou celles dont les états financiers sont consolidés.



Même groupe










2006, c. 12, s. 10



261. Section 11.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









261. L’article 11.1 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 10










Registration requirement



11.1 Except as otherwise provided in the regulations, every person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(h) or (h.1), those referred to in paragraph 5(l) that sell money orders to the public, and every other person or entity that is referred to in section 5 and that is prescribed must be registered with the Centre in accord-ance with this section and sections 11.11 to 11.2.









11.1 Sauf disposition contraire des règlements, sont inscrites auprès du Centre, en conformité avec le présent article et les articles 11.11 à 11.2, les personnes ou entités visées aux alinéas 5h) ou h.1), celles visées à l’alinéa 5l) qui vendent des mandats-poste au public ainsi que toutes celles qui sont mentionnées à l’article 5 et visées par règlement.



Obligation de s’inscrire










2006, c. 12, s. 11



262. (1) Subparagraphs 11.11(1)(c)(i) to (iv) of the Act are replaced by the following:









262. (1) L’alinéa 11.11(1)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11












(i) a money laundering offence, or an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to a money laundering offence,






(ii) a terrorist activity financing offence, or an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to a terrorist activity financing offence,






(iii) an offence under this Act or the Proceeds of Crime (money laundering) Act, chapter 26 of the Statutes of Canada, 1991 when convicted on indictment, or an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to an offence under either Act,






(iv) an offence under any of sections 83.18 to 83.231, 354 or 467.11 to 467.13 of the Criminal Code, or an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to such an offence, or









c) la personne ou entité condamnée pour l’une ou l’autre des infractions ci-après ou qui a été condamnée pour une infraction essentiellement similaire prévue par les lois d’un pays étranger :






(i) une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité,






(ii) une infraction de financement des activités terroristes,






(iii) une infraction prévue par la présente loi ou par la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité, chapitre 26 des Lois du Canada (1991), ayant fait l’objet d’une poursuite par mise en accusation,






(iv) une infraction prévue à l’un ou l’autre des articles 83.18 à 83.231, 354 et 467.11 à 467.13 du Code criminel,






(v) un complot ou une tentative en vue de commettre l’une ou l’autre des infractions visées aux alinéas (i) à (iv) ou le fait d’en être complice après le fait ou d’en conseiller la perpétration;












2006, c. 12, s. 11



(2) Paragraphs 11.11(1)(d) and (e) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les alinéas 11.11(1)d) et e) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11












(d) a person or entity that has been convicted on indictment or convicted more than once for an offence under any of the following, or that has been convicted of an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to an offence under any of the following:






(i) Part X of the Criminal Code,






(ii) the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, except for the offence under subsection 4(1) of that Act,






(iii) section 39, 44.2, 44.3, 48, 50.2 or 50.3 of the Food and Drugs Act, as that section read immediately before May 14, 1997, or






(iv) section 4, 5, 6, 19.1 or 19.2 of the Narcotic Control Act, chapter N-1 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1985, as that section read immediately before May 14, 1997;






(e) an entity that is a corporation in respect of which a director, the chief executive officer, the president or a person who owns or controls, directly or indirectly, 20% or more of the shares has been convicted on indictment of an offence under this Act or the Proceeds of Crime (money laundering) Act, chapter 26 of the Statutes of Canada, 1991 or has been convicted of an offence under the laws of a foreign country that is substantially similar to an offence under either Act;









d) la personne ou entité condamnée par voie de mise en accusation ou condamnée plus d’une fois pour l’une ou l’autre des infractions ci-après ou qui a été condamnée pour une infraction essentiellement similaire prévue par les lois d’un pays étranger :






(i) une infraction prévue à la partie X du Code criminel,






(ii) une infraction prévue par la Loi réglementant certaines drogues et autres substances, à l’exception de celle prévue au paragraphe 4(1) de cette loi,






(iii) une infraction prévue aux articles 39, 44.2, 44.3, 48, 50.2 ou 50.3 de la Loi sur les aliments et drogues, dans leur version antérieure au 14 mai 1997,






(iv) aux articles 4, 5, 6, 19.1 ou 19.2 de la Loi sur les stupéfiants, chapitre N-1 des Lois révisées du Canada (1985), dans leur version antérieure au 14 mai 1997;






e) l’entité qui est une personne morale dont l’un des administrateurs, le premier dirigeant, le président, ou toute personne qui détient ou contrôle, directement ou indirectement, au moins vingt pour cent des actions a été déclaré coupable, par mise en accusation, d’une infraction prévue par la présente loi ou la Loi sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité, chapitre 26 des Lois du Canada (1991) ou a été condamnée pour une infraction essentiellement similaire prévue par les lois d’un pays étranger;
















(3) Subsection 11.11(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (e):









(3) Le paragraphe 11.11(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :
















(e.1) a person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(h.1) that, having committed a violation, or a series of minor violations, under this Act that is classified as a serious violation or a very serious violation and being liable to a penalty for it, and 30 days having elapsed since the day on which all proceedings in respect of the violation are ended, has still not paid the penalty together with any interest imposed under section 73.28; or









e.1) une personne ou entité visée à l’alinéa 5h.1) qui a commis une violation à la loi qualifiée de grave ou très grave ou une série de violations mineures assimilées à une violation grave ou très grave pour laquelle une pénalité est imposée et qui, à l’expiration d’un délai de trente jours suivant la fin de la procédure en violation, n’a pas encore payé la pénalité ni les intérêts prévus à l’article 73.28;












2006, c. 12, s. 11



263. Subsection 11.12(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









263. Le paragraphe 11.12(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11










Application for registration



11.12 (1) An application for registration shall be submitted to the Centre in the prescribed form and manner and shall include








(a) a list of the applicant’s agents, mandataries or branches that are engaged, on behalf of the applicant, in the activities referred to in paragraph 5(h) or (h.1), in selling money orders to the public if the applicant is a person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(l), or in any prescribed activities;








(b) if the applicant is a person referred to in paragraph 5(h.1)








(i) the name and address for service of an individual who resides in Canada and who is authorized to accept, on behalf of the person, notices that are served or caused to be served by the Centre under this Act,








(ii) a document that sets out the person’s record of criminal convictions, or states that the person does not have one, that is issued by a competent authority of the foreign state in which the person resides, and, if the document is made in a language other than English or French, a translation of it into one of those languages attested to by a person who is recognized as a certified translator by a provincial organization or body that is competent under provincial law to issue such certifications;








(c) if the applicant is an entity referred to in paragraph 5(h.1)








(i) the name and address for service of an individual who resides in Canada and who is authorized to accept, on behalf of the entity, notices that are served or caused to be served by the Centre under this Act, and








(ii) for each of the chief executive officer, the president and the directors of the entity and for each person who owns or controls, directly or indirectly, 20% or more of the entity or the shares of the entity, a document that sets out the person’s record of criminal convictions, or states that the person does not have one, and that is issued by a competent authority of the foreign state in which the person resides, and, if the document is made in a language other than English or French, a translation of it into one of those languages attested to by a person who is recognized as a certified translator by a provincial organization or body that is competent under provincial law to issue such certifications; and








(d) any prescribed information.









11.12 (1) La demande d’inscription est présentée au Centre selon les modalités réglementaires et est accompagnée :



Demande d’inscription




a) d’une liste des mandataires ou succursales du demandeur qui se livrent, pour le compte de celui-ci, aux activités visées aux alinéas 5h) ou h.1), à la vente de mandats-poste au public si le demandeur est une personne ou entité visée à l’alinéa 5l) ou à toute autre activité visée par règlement;








b) lorsque le demandeur est une personne visée à l’alinéa 5h.1) :








(i) du nom et de l’adresse, aux fins de signification, d’un individu qui réside au Canada et qui est autorisé à accepter, au nom de la personne, des avis signifiés par le Centre en vertu de la présente loi ou que celui-ci fait signifier en vertu de celle-ci,








(ii) d’un document qui fait état des condamnations criminelles portées à son dossier — ou attestant l’absence de dossier — délivré par une autorité compétente de l’État étranger où elle réside et, si le document est dans une langue autre que le français ou l’anglais, d’une traduction en français ou en anglais attestée par une personne qui détient une certification professionnelle pour agir en tant que traducteur agréé qui lui a été délivrée par un organisme provincial autorisé en vertu de la législation provinciale;








c) lorsque le demandeur est une entité visée à l’alinéa 5h.1) :








(i) du nom et de l’adresse, aux fins de signification, d’un individu qui réside au Canada et qui est autorisé à accepter, au nom de l’entité, des avis signifiés par le Centre en vertu de la présente loi ou que celui-ci fait signifier en vertu de celle-ci,








(ii) pour le premier dirigeant de l’entité, son président, chacun de ses administrateurs et toute personne qui détient ou contrôle, directement ou indirectement, au moins vingt pour cent de l’entité ou au moins vingt pour cent des actions de celle-ci, d’un document pour chacun de ceux-ci qui fait état des condamnations criminelles portées au dossier — ou attestant l’absence de dossier — et qui est délivré par une autorité compétente de l’État étranger où chacun de ceux-ci réside et, si le document est dans une langue autre que le français ou l’anglais, d’une traduction en français ou en anglais attestée par une personne qui détient une certification professionnelle pour agir en tant que traducteur agréé qui lui a été délivrée par un organisme provincial autorisé en vertu de la législation provinciale;








d) de tout autre renseignement prévu par règlement.














2006, c. 12, s. 11



264. Section 11.13 of the Act is renumbered as subsection 11.13(1) and is amended by adding the following:









264. L’article 11.13 de la même loi devient le paragraphe 11.13(1) et est modifié par adjonction de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11










Denial or revocation



(2) If the name or address for service of a person referred to in subparagraph 11.12(1)(b)(i) or (c)(i) changes, and an applicant or registered person or entity who is or was required to provide the information described in paragraph 11.12(1)(b) or (c) does not, within the period provided in subsection (1), provide the Centre with the new name or address for service, the Centre shall without delay after becoming aware of that fact deny the application, or revoke the registration, as the case may be, and shall, without delay, inform the applicant or registered person or entity of the denial or revocation.









(2) Si le nom ou l’adresse visé aux sous-alinéas 11.12(1)b)(i) ou c)(i) est modifié et que le demandeur ou la personne ou l’entité qui est tenue de fournir les renseignements visés aux alinéas 11.12(1)b) ou c) ne fournit pas le nouveau nom ou la nouvelle adresse au Centre dans le délai prévu au paragraphe (1), le Centre, au moment où il prend connaissance de ce fait, refuse ou révoque sans délai son inscription, selon le cas, et en avise sans délai l’intéressé.



Refus ou révocation










2006, c. 12, s. 11



265. Subsection 11.14(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









265. Le paragraphe 11.14(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11










Clarifications — applicant



11.14 (1) An applicant shall provide the Centre, in the prescribed form and manner, with any clarifications that the Centre may request in respect of the information described in subsection 11.12(1) within 30 days after the day on which the request is made.









11.14 (1) Le demandeur apporte à sa demande d’inscription les précisions requises par le Centre relativement aux renseignements visés au paragraphe 11.12(1) et les lui transmet, selon les modalités réglementaires, dans les trente jours suivant la requête de celui-ci.



Précisions : demandeur










2006, c. 12, s. 11



266. Subsection 11.17(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









266. Le paragraphe 11.17(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 11










Clarifications — registrant



11.17 (1) A registered person or entity shall provide the Centre, in the prescribed form and manner, with any clarifications that the Centre may request in respect of the information described in subsection 11.12(1) within 30 days after the day on which the request is made.









11.17 (1) Tout inscrit fournit les précisions requises par le Centre relativement aux renseignements visés au paragraphe 11.12(1) et les lui transmet, selon les modalités réglementaires, dans les trente jours suivant la requête de celui-ci.



Précisions : inscrit










2010, c. 12, s. 1869



267. Section 11.41 of the Act is replaced by the following:









267. L’article 11.41 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1869










Definitions



11.41 The following definitions apply in this Part.




“foreign entity”« entité étrangère »



“foreign entity” means an entity, other than an entity referred to in section 5, that is incorporated or formed by or under the laws of a country other than Canada, including its subsidiaries, if any, and that does not carry on business in Canada, if it carries out activities similar to those of entities referred to in any of paragraphs 5(a) to (g) or activities referred to in paragraph 5(h) or (h.1).




“foreign state”« État étranger »



“foreign state” means a country other than Canada and includes any political subdivision or territory of a foreign state. 









11.41 Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente partie.



Définitions




« entité étrangère » Entité, à l’exception d’une entité visée à l’article 5, qui est constituée en personne morale ou formée sous le régime de la législation d’un pays étranger, notamment toute filiale de celle-ci, et qui n’exerce pas ses activités au Canada, dans le cas ou elle exerce des activités semblables à celles des entités visées à l’un des alinéas 5a) à g) ou à celles prévues aux alinéas 5h) ou h.1).



« entité étrangère »“foreign entity”




« État étranger » Pays autre que le Canada; est assimilé à un État étranger toute subdivision politique ou tout territoire de celui-ci. 



« État étranger »“foreign state”










2010, c. 12, s. 1869



268. (1) Subsection 11.42(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









268. (1) Le paragraphe 11.42(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1869










Minister’s written directive



11.42 (1) In addition to any other measure required by this Act, the Minister may, by written directive, require any person or entity referred to in section 5 to take, in order to safeguard the integrity of Canada’s financial system, any measure specified in the directive with respect to any financial transaction, or any financial transaction within a class of financial transactions, originating from or bound for any foreign state or foreign entity, that occurs or is attempted in the course of their activities, or with respect to any activity that is related to any such financial transaction or class of financial transactions.









11.42 (1) En sus de toute autre mesure prévue par la présente loi, le ministre peut, au moyen d’une directive écrite, et ce, afin de protéger l’intégrité du système financier canadien, enjoindre à toute personne ou entité visée à l’article 5 de prendre toute mesure que le ministre précise concernant toute opération financière — ou toute opération financière faisant partie d’une catégorie d’opérations financières — qui émane d’un État étranger ou d’une entité étrangère ou qui est destinée à l’un ou l’autre et qui est effectuée ou tentée dans le cours des activités de la personne ou de l’entité ou concernant toute activité qui est liée à l’une de ces opérations.



Directive ministérielle












(2) Section 11.42 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(2) L’article 11.42 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Non-application to legal counsel



(2.1) A requirement in a directive to take a reporting measure as contemplated by paragraph (2)(e) does not apply to persons or entities referred to in paragraph 5(i) or (j) who are, as the case may be, legal counsel or legal firms, when they are providing legal services.









(2.1) Les mesures à prendre en vertu d’une directive qui sont visées à l’alinéa (2)e) ne s’appliquent pas aux personnes ni aux entités visées aux alinéas 5i) ou j) qui sont, selon le cas, des conseillers juridiques ou des cabinets juridiques, lorsqu’elles fournissent des services juridiques.



Non-application aux conseillers juridiques










2010, c. 12, s. 1869



269. Sections 11.44 and 11.45 of the Act are replaced by the following:









269. Les articles 11.44 et 11.45 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1869










Foreign branches and subsidiaries



11.44 (1) Every entity referred to in any of paragraphs 5(a) to (g), except for authorized foreign banks within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act and for foreign companies within the meaning of section 2 of the Insurance Companies Act, shall ensure that its foreign branches, and that its foreign subsidiaries that carry out activities similar to those of entities referred to in those paragraphs and that are either wholly-owned by the entity or have financial statements that are consolidated with those of the entity, comply with any directive issued under this Part, except with respect to any reporting measure as contemplated by paragraph 11.42(2)(e), to the extent it is permitted by, and does not conflict with, the laws of the country in which the branch or subsidiary is located.









11.44 (1) Toute entité visée à l’un des alinéas 5a) à g), à l’exclusion des banques étrangères autorisées, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les banques, et des sociétés étrangères, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances, veille à ce que ses succursales étrangères et ses filiales étrangères qui exercent des activités semblables à celles des entités visées à ces alinéas qui sont ses filiales à cent pour cent ou avec lesquelles ses états financiers sont consolidés se conforment, lorsque cela est permis par les lois du pays où se trouve la succursale ou la filiale et n’entre pas en conflit avec les lois de ce pays, à toute directive donnée au titre de la présente partie, sauf en ce qui a trait à toute mesure de déclaration visée à l’alinéa 11.42(2)e).



Succursales et filiales étrangères










Records and reporting



(2) If compliance with a directive by a branch or a subsidiary is not permitted by or would conflict with the laws of the country in which the branch or subsidiary is located, the entity shall keep and retain, in accordance with section 6, a record of that fact and of the reasons why it is not permitted or it would conflict, and shall, within a reasonable time, notify the Centre, and the principal agency or body that supervises or regulates it under federal or provincial law, of that fact and those reasons.









(2) L’entité tient et conserve, en application de l’article 6, les cas où une de ses succursales ou de ses filiales ne peut se conformer à une directive parce que cela n’est pas permis par les lois du pays où se trouve la succursale ou la filiale dans lequel elle se trouve ou entrerait en conflit avec les lois de ce pays, motifs à l’appui, les signale au Centre et à l’autorité ou à l’organisme principal de surveillance ou de réglementation dont elle relève sous le régime d’une loi fédérale ou provinciale dans un délai raisonnable.



Tenue de documents










2010, c. 12, s. 1869



270. Section 11.6 of the Act is replaced by the following:









270. L’article 11.6 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1869










Foreign branches



11.6 Every entity referred to in any of paragraphs 5(a) to (g), except for authorized foreign banks within the meaning of section 2 of the Bank Act and for foreign companies within the meaning of section 2 of the Insurance Companies Act, shall ensure that its foreign branches comply with any regulation made under subsection 11.49(1) to the extent it is permitted by, and does not conflict with, the laws of the country in which the branch is located.









11.6 Toute entité visée à l’un des alinéas 5a) à g), à l’exclusion des banques étrangères autorisées, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les banques, et des sociétés étrangères, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les sociétés d’assurances, veille à ce que leurs succursales étrangères se conforment, lorsque cela est permis par les lois du pays où se trouve la succursale et n’entre pas en conflit avec celles-ci, à tout règlement pris en vertu du paragraphe 11.49(1).



Succursales étrangères












271. The Act is amended by adding the following before the heading “Reporting” before section 12:









271. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, avant l’intertitre « Déclaration » qui précède l’article 12 :












Interpretation









Interprétation












Definition of “officer”



11.8 In this Part, “officer” has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the Customs Act.









11.8 Dans la présente partie, « agent » s’entend au sens de « agent » et « agent des douanes » au paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les douanes.



Définition de « agent »












272. Subsections 12(4) and (5) of the Act are replaced by the following:









272. Les paragraphes 12(4) et (5) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Duty to answer and comply



(4) Every person arriving in or departing from Canada shall








(a) answer truthfully any questions asked by the officer in the performance of the officer’s duties and functions under this Part; and








(b) if the person is arriving in or departing from Canada with any currency or monetary instruments in respect of which a report is made, on request of an officer, present the currency or monetary instruments that they are carrying or transporting, unload any conveyance or part of a conveyance or baggage and open or unpack any package or container that the officer wishes to examine.









(4) Toute personne qui entre au Canada ou quitte le pays doit :



Obligation de répondre et de se conformer




a) répondre véridiquement aux questions que lui pose un agent dans l’exercice des attributions que lui confère la présente partie;








b) si elle entre au Canada ou quitte le pays avec des espèces ou effets une fois la déclaration faite, à la demande de l’agent, lui présenter les espèces ou effets qu’elle transporte, décharger les moyens de transport et en ouvrir les parties et ouvrir ou défaire les colis et autres contenants que l’agent veut examiner.














Sending reports to Centre



(5) The Canada Border Services Agency shall send the reports they receive under subsection (1) to the Centre. It shall also create an electronic version of the information contained in each report, in the format specified by the Centre, and send it to the Centre by the electronic means specified by the Centre.









(5) L’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada fait parvenir au Centre les déclarations recueillies en application du paragraphe (1) et établit, dans la forme prévue par le Centre, une version électronique des renseignements contenus dans chaque déclaration qu’elle transmet au Centre par les moyens électroniques prévus par celui-ci.



Transmission au Centre










2006, c. 12, s. 14



273. The portion of subsection 24.1(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









273. Le passage du paragraphe 24.1(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 14










Corrective measures



24.1 (1) The Minister, or any officer delegated by the President for the purposes of this section, may, within 90 days after a seizure made under subsection 18(1) or an assessment of a penalty referred to in subsection 18(2),









24.1 (1) Le ministre ou l’agent que le président délègue pour l’application du présent article peut, dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la saisie effectuée en vertu du paragraphe 18(1) ou l’établissement de la pénalité réglementaire visée au paragraphe 18(2) :



Mesures de redressement










2001, c. 41, s. 61



274. Section 25 of the Act is replaced by the following:









274. L’article 25 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 41, art. 61










Request for Minister’s decision



25. A person from whom currency or monetary instruments were seized under section 18, or the lawful owner of the currency or monetary instruments, may, within 90 days after the date of the seizure, request a decision of the Minister as to whether subsection 12(1) was contravened, by giving notice to the Minister in writing or by any other means satisfactory to the Minister.









25. La personne entre les mains de qui ont été saisis des espèces ou effets en vertu de l’article 18 ou leur propriétaire légitime peut, dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la saisie, demander au ministre au moyen d’un avis écrit ou de toute autre manière que celui-ci juge indiquée de décider s’il y a eu contravention au paragraphe 12(1).



Demande de révision










Extension of time by Minister



25.1 (1) If no request for a decision of the Minister is made under section 25 within the period provided in that section, the person or lawful owner referred to in that section may apply to the Minister in writing or by any other means satisfactory to the Minister for an extension of the time for making the request.









25.1 (1) La personne ou le propriétaire légitime visé à l’article 25 qui n’a pas présenté la demande visée à cet article dans le délai qui y est prévu peut demander au ministre, par écrit ou de toute autre manière que celui-ci juge indiquée, de proroger ce délai.



Prorogation du délai par le ministre










Reasons



(2) An application shall set out the reasons why the request was not made on time.









(2) La demande de prorogation énonce les raisons pour lesquelles la demande n’a pas été présentée dans le délai prévu.



Contenu de la demande










Burden of proof



(3) The burden of proof that an application has been made under subsection (1) lies on the person or lawful owner claiming to have made it.









(3) Il incombe à la personne ou au propriétaire légitime qui affirme avoir présenté la demande de prorogation visée au paragraphe (1) de prouver qu’il l’a présentée.



Fardeau de la preuve










Notice of decision



(4) The Minister shall, without delay after making a decision in respect of an application, notify the applicant in writing of the decision.









(4) Dès qu’il a rendu sa décision, le ministre en avise par écrit l’auteur de la demande.



Décision du ministre










Conditions for granting application



(5) The application is not to be granted unless








(a) it is made within one year after the end of the period provided in section 25; and








(b) the applicant demonstrates that








(i) within the period provided in section 25, they were unable to act or to instruct another person to act in their name or had a bona fide intention to request a decision,








(ii) it would be just and equitable to grant the application, and








(iii) the application was made as soon as circumstances permitted.









(5) Il n’est fait droit à la demande que si les conditions suivantes sont réunies :



Conditions d’acceptation de la demande




a) la demande est présentée dans l’année suivant l’expiration du délai prévu à l’article 25;








b) l’auteur de la demande établit ce qui suit :








(i) au cours du délai prévu à l’article 25, il n’a pu ni agir ni mandater quelqu’un pour agir en son nom, ou il avait véritablement l’intention de demander qu’une décision soit rendue,








(ii) il serait juste et équitable de faire droit à la demande,








(iii) la demande a été présentée dès que possible.














Extension of time by Federal Court



25.2 (1) The person or lawful owner referred to in section 25 may apply to the Federal Court to have their application under section 25.1 granted








(a) within the period of 90 days after the Minister dismisses that application, if it is dismissed; or








(b) after 90 days have expired after that application was made, if the Minister has not notified the person or lawful owner of a decision made in respect of it.









25.2 (1) La personne ou le propriétaire légitime qui a présenté une demande de prorogation en vertu de l’article 25.1 peut, dans le délai ci-après, demander à la Cour fédérale d’y faire droit :



Prorogation du délai par la Cour fédérale




a) soit dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant le rejet de la demande par le ministre;








b) soit à l’expiration d’un délai de quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la présentation de la demande, si le ministre ne l’a pas avisé de sa décision.














Application process



(2) The application shall be made by filing in the Federal Court a copy of the application made under section 25.1, and any notice given in respect of it. The applicant shall notify the Minister that they have filed the application immediately after having filed it.









(2) La demande se fait par dépôt auprès de la Cour fédérale d’une copie de la demande de prorogation présentée en vertu de l’article 25.1 et de tout avis donné à son égard. L’auteur de la demande avise immédiatement le ministre du dépôt.



Modalités










Powers of the Court



(3) The Court may grant or dismiss the application and, if it grants the application, may impose any terms that it considers just or order that the request made under section 25 be deemed to have been made on the date the order was made.









(3) La Cour peut rejeter la demande ou y faire droit. Dans ce dernier cas, elle peut imposer les conditions qu’elle estime justes ou ordonner que la demande présentée en vertu de l’article 25 soit réputée avoir été présentée à la date de l’ordonnance.



Pouvoirs de la Cour fédérale










Conditions for granting application



(4) The application is not to be granted unless








(a) the application under subsection 25.1(1) was made within one year after the end of the period provided in section 25; and








(b) the person or lawful owner making the application demonstrates that








(i) within the period provided in section 25, they were unable to act or to instruct another person to act in their name or had a bona fide intention to request a decision,








(ii) it would be just and equitable to grant the application, and








(iii) the application was made as soon as circumstances permitted.









(4) Il n’est fait droit à la demande que si les conditions suivantes sont réunies :



Conditions d’acceptation de la demande




a) la demande de prorogation a été présentée en vertu du paragraphe 25.1(1) dans l’année suivant l’expiration du délai prévu à l’article 25;








b) l’auteur de la demande établit ce qui suit :








(i) au cours du délai prévu à l’article 25, il n’a pu ni agir ni mandater quelqu’un pour agir en son nom, ou il avait véritablement l’intention de demander qu’une décision soit rendue,








(ii) il serait juste et équitable de faire droit à la demande,








(iii) la demande a été présentée dès que possible.














2006, c. 12, s. 22(1)



275. (1) Subsection 36(1.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









275. (1) Le paragraphe 36(1.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 22(1)










Use of information



(1.1) An officer may use information referred to in subsection (1) if the officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information is relevant to determining whether a person is a person described in sections 34 to 42 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act or is relevant to an offence under any of sections 91, 117 to 119, 126 or 127 of that Act.









(1.1) L’agent peut utiliser les renseignements visés au paragraphe (1) s’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner qu’ils seraient utiles afin d’établir si une personne est visée par les articles 34 à 42 de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés ou qu’ils se rapportent à toute infraction prévue à l’un des articles 91, 117 à 119, 126 et 127 de cette loi.



Utilisation des renseignements












(2) Subsection 36(3.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 36(3.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Disclosure of information to Canada Revenue Agency



(3.01) An officer may disclose to the Canada Revenue Agency information referred to in subsection (1) about the circumstances of a seizure under subsection 18(1) if the officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that the currency or monetary instruments seized








(a) are proceeds of crime as defined in subsection 462.3(1) of the Criminal Code or funds for use in the financing of terrorist activities; and








(b) relate to a registered charity as defined in subsection 248(1) of the Income Tax Act, to an entity that has applied for registration as such a registered charity, or to a person or any other entity that solicits charitable financial donations from the public.









(3.01) L’agent peut communiquer à l’Agence du revenu du Canada les renseignements visés au paragraphe (1) exposant les circonstances de la saisie visée au paragraphe 18(1) s’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que les espèces ou effets saisis :



Communication à l’Agence du revenu du Canada




a) sont des produits de la criminalité au sens du paragraphe 462.3(1) du Code criminel ou des fonds destinés au financement des activités terroristes;








b) concernent un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré au sens du paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu, une entité ayant fait une demande d’enregistrement à cet effet ou une personne ou une entité qui sollicite des dons de bienfaisance en argent du public.














Recording of reasons for decision



(3.1) If an officer decides to disclose information under any of subsections (2) to (3.01), the officer shall record in writing the reasons for the decision.









(3.1) L’agent qui décide de communiquer des renseignements en vertu de l’un des paragraphes (2) à (3.01) est tenu de consigner par écrit les motifs à l’appui de sa décision.



Enregistrement des motifs












276. (1) The portion of section 40 of the English version of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









276. (1) Le passage de l’article 40 de la version anglaise de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Object



40. The object of this Part is to establish an agency that









40. The object of this Part is to establish an agency that



Object












(2) Paragraph 40(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 40a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) acts at arm’s length and is independent from law enforcement agencies and other entities to which it is authorized to disclose information under subsection 55(3), 55.1(1) or 56.1(1) or (2);









a) est autonome et indépendant de tout organisme chargé de l’application de la loi et des autres entités à qui il est autorisé à communiquer des renseignements en vertu des paragraphes 55(3), 55.1(1) ou 56.1(1) ou (2);














(3) Paragraph 40(d) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 40d) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(d) operates to enhance public awareness and understanding of matters related to money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities; and









d) sensibilise le public aux questions liées au recyclage des produits de la criminalité et au financement des activités terroristes;












2010, c. 12, s. 1871



277. Subsections 52(2) to (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:









277. Les paragraphes 52(2) à (4) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2010, ch.12, art. 1871










Director to report to Minister



(1.1) On or before September 30 of each year, the Director shall submit to the Minister a report on the Centre’s activities for the preceding year that includes the following information about that year’s activities as well as information on any matters that the Minister or an officer of the Department of Finance specifies:








(a) a description of the activities carried out by the Centre to ensure compliance with Parts 1 and 1.1, including a description of those activities by class of persons or entities referred to in section 5, and of its conclusions as to the compliance of those persons or entities with Parts 1 and 1.1;








(b) any measures undertaken under paragraph 58(1)(c); and








(c) a description, with the relevant statistics included, of the results achieved by and the effectiveness of the Centre in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties and functions.









(1.1) Au plus tard le 30 septembre de chaque année, le directeur soumet au ministre un rapport sur les activités du Centre pour l’année précédente qui comporte les renseignements ci-après relativement à ces activités ainsi que les renseignements sur toutes matières précisées par le ministre ou un fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances :



Communication de renseignements au ministre




a) une description des activités exercées par le Centre pour assurer le respect des parties 1 et 1.1, notamment par catégorie de personnes ou entités visées à l’article 5, ainsi que les conclusions du Centre quant au respect des parties 1 et 1.1 par ces personnes ou entités;








b) les mesures prises en vertu du paragraphe 58(1)c);








c) une description des résultats obtenus par le Centre, accompagnée des données statistiques pertinentes, ainsi qu’une description de l’efficacité du Centre dans l’exercice de ses attributions.














Obligation to inform



(2) The Director shall keep the Minister and any officer of the Department of Finance whom the Director considers appropriate informed of any matter that could materially affect public policy or the strategic direction of the Centre, and any other matter that the Minister considers necessary.









(2) Le directeur renseigne régulièrement le ministre et le fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances que le directeur estime qualifié sur toutes matières qui pourraient toucher notablement les questions d’ordre public et les orientations stratégiques du Centre et leur donne les autres renseignements que le ministre estime nécessaires.



Obligation de renseigner le ministre et un fonctionnaire










Director to disclose other information



(3) The Director shall, at the request of the Minister or an officer of the Department of Finance, disclose to the Minister or the officer, as the case may be, in the form and manner that the Minister or officer directs, any information obtained by the Centre in the administration and enforcement of this Act, or any information prepared by the Centre from that information, that the Minister or the officer considers relevant for the purpose of carrying out the Minister’s powers and duties under this Act.









(3) Sur demande du ministre ou d’un fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances et selon les modalités qu’il précise, le directeur communique au demandeur les renseignements que le ministre ou le fonctionnaire estime utiles à l’exercice des attributions du ministre en vertu de la présente loi et qui sont obtenus par le Centre dans le cadre de l’exécution et du contrôle d’application de la présente loi ou qui sont préparés par le Centre à partir de ces renseignements.



Communication d’autres renseignements par le directeur










Disclosure of information to advisor



(4) The Director shall disclose to a person engaged under subsection 42(4), in the form and manner that the person directs, any information obtained by the Centre in the administration and enforcement of this Act, or any information prepared by the Centre from that information, that the person considers relevant for the purpose of advising the Minister on any matter referred to in subsection 42(2).









(4) Le directeur communique à la personne dont les services ont été retenus au titre du paragraphe 42(4), selon les modalités qu’elle précise, les renseignements que celle-ci estime utiles pour conseiller le ministre sur les matières mentionnées à ce paragraphe et qui sont obtenus par le Centre dans le cadre de l’exécution et du contrôle d’application de la présente loi ou qui sont préparés par le Centre à partir de ces renseignements que celle-ci estime utiles pour conseiller le ministre sur les matières mentionnées à ce paragraphe.



Communication de renseignements au conseiller










2010, c. 12, s. 1872



278. Sections 53 to 53.2 of the Act are replaced by the following:









278. Les articles 53 à 53.2 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1872










Limitation



53. (1) The Director shall not disclose under section 52








(a) any information collected by the Centre under subparagraph 54(1)(b)(ii);








(b) any information referred to in paragraphs 55(1)(a) to (b.1), (c) or (d);








(c) any information referred to in paragraph 55(1)(e) that the Centre prepared for possible disclosure under subsection 55(3), section 55.1 or subsection 56.1(1) or (2); or








(d) any information that would directly or indirectly identify a client or employee of a person or entity referred to in section 5.









53. (1) L’article 52 n’autorise pas le directeur à communiquer des renseignements :



Restrictions




a) recueillis par le Centre en vertu du sous-alinéa 54(1)b)(ii), à l’exception des renseignements accessibles au public;








b) visés aux alinéas 55(1)a) à b.1), c) ou d);








c) visés à l’alinéa 55(1)e) et préparés par le Centre en vue de leur communication éventuelle en vertu du paragraphe 55(3), de l’article 55.1 ou des paragraphes 56.1(1) ou (2);








d) permettant d’identifier, même indirectement, un client ou un employé d’une personne ou entité visée à l’article 5.














Clarification



(2) For greater certainty, if information referred to in subsection (1) is contained in a document, whether in written form or in any other form, that is otherwise required to be disclosed under section 52, the Director shall provide the document with that information excluded.









(2) Il est entendu que si les renseignements visés au paragraphe (1) se trouvent dans un document — quel qu’en soit la forme ou le support — qui doit être communiqué en application de l’article 52, le directeur fournit le document sans ces renseignements.



Précision










Director or officer to disclose information for the purpose of Part 1.1



53.1 (1) The Director shall, at the request of the Minister or an officer of the Department of Finance, disclose to the Minister or the officer, as the case may be, in the form and manner that the Minister or officer directs, any information received or collected by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(a) or (b), or any analysis conducted by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(c), that the Minister or the officer considers relevant for the purpose of carrying out the Minister’s powers and duties under Part 1.1.









53.1 (1) Le directeur communique, sur demande, au ministre ou à un fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances, selon les modalités que le ministre ou le fonctionnaire précise, les renseignements recueillis par le Centre en application des alinéas 54(1)a) ou b) — ou les analyses effectuées par celui-ci en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c) — que le demandeur estime utiles à l’exercice des attributions conférées au ministre par la partie 1.1.



Communication de renseignements pour l’application de la partie 1.1










Director may disclose information



(2) If the Director is of the opinion that information received or collected by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(a) or (b), or any analysis conducted by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(c), would assist the Minister in carrying out the Minister’s powers and duties under Part 1.1, the Director may disclose that information or analysis to the Minister or any officer of the Department of Finance whom the Director considers appropriate.









(2) S’il est d’avis que les renseignements recueillis par le Centre en application des alinéas 54(1)a) ou b) — ou les analyses effectuées par celui-ci en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c) — sont susceptibles d’aider le ministre à exercer les attributions que lui confère la partie 1.1, le directeur peut les communiquer au ministre ou à un fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances qu’il estime qualifié.



Pouvoir du directeur de communiquer des renseignements










Limitation



53.2 (1) The Director shall not disclose under section 53.1 any information that would directly or indirectly identify any person or entity other than a foreign entity as defined in section 11.41.









53.2 (1) Toutefois, le directeur ne peut communiquer des renseignements visés à l’article 53.1 qui permettraient d’identifier, même indirectement, une personne ou une entité, à l’exception d’une entité étrangère, au sens de l’article 11.41.



Exception










Clarification



(2) For greater certainty, if information referred to in subsection (1) is contained in a document, whether in written form or in any other form, that is otherwise required or permitted to be disclosed under section 53.1, the Director shall provide the document with that information excluded.









(2) Il est entendu que si les renseignements visés au paragraphe (1) se trouvent dans un document — quel que soit la forme ou le support — qui doit ou peut être communiqué au titre de l’article 53.1, le directeur fournit le document sans ces renseignements.



Précision










2010, c. 12, s. 1872



279. The portion of subsection 53.3(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









279. Le passage du paragraphe 53.3(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1872










Director to seek consent



53.3 (1) The Director shall seek consent for disclosure of information that was provided to the Centre in confidence by the institutions, agencies or organizations mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c), as the case may be, if that information is contained in the information or analysis requested by the Minister or an officer of the Department of Finance under subsection 53.1(1):









53.3 (1) Le directeur doit tenter d’obtenir des organismes, autorités ou organisations concernés qui sont mentionnés ci-après leur consentement à la communication au ministre de l’information qu’ils ont transmise au Centre à titre confidentiel qui est contenue dans les renseignements ou les analyses demandés par le ministre ou un fonctionnaire du ministère des Finances en vertu du paragraphe 53.1(1) :



Consentement










2004, c. 15, s. 100; 2010, c. 12, s. 1873



280. (1) The portion of section 54 of the Act before paragraph (c) is replaced by the following:









280. (1) Le passage de l’article 54 de la même loi précédant l’alinéa c) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2004, ch. 15, art. 100; 2010, ch. 12, art. 1873










Reports and information



54. (1) The Centre








(a) shall receive reports made under section 7, 7.1, 9, 12 or 20, or in accordance with a directive issued under Part 1.1, incomplete reports sent under subsection 14(5), reports referred to in section 9.1, information provided to the Centre by any agency of another country that has powers and duties similar to those of the Centre, information provided to the Centre by law enforcement agencies or government institutions or agencies, and other information voluntarily provided to the Centre about suspicions of money laundering or of the financing of terrorist activities;








(b) may collect information that the Centre considers relevant to money laundering activities or the financing of terrorist activities and that








(i) is publicly available, including in a commercially available database, or








(ii) is stored in a database maintained, for purposes related to law enforcement or national security, by the federal government, by a provincial government, by the government of a foreign state or by an international organization, if an agreement was entered into under subsection 66(1) to collect such information;









54. (1) Le Centre :



Rapports et renseignements




a) recueille les rapports ou déclarations faits conformément aux articles 7, 7.1, 9, 12 ou 20 ou à toute directive donnée au titre de la partie 1.1 et les déclarations incomplètes qui lui sont transmises conformément au paragraphe 14(5), les rapports visés à l’article 9.1, les renseignements qui lui sont fournis soit par des organismes étrangers ayant des attributions semblables aux siennes, soit par des organismes chargés de l’application de la loi ou autres autorités publiques, ainsi que tout renseignement qui lui est transmis volontairement et qui se rapporte à des soupçons de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou de financement des activités terroristes;








b) peut recueillir tout renseignement qu’il croit se rapporter à des activités de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou au financement des activités terroristes et qui est :








(i) soit accessible au public, notamment par une banque de données mise sur le marché,








(ii) soit contenu dans une banque de données tenue, dans le cadre de l’application des lois ou à des fins liées à la sécurité nationale, par le gouvernement fédéral, un gouvernement provincial, le gouvernement d’un État étranger ou une organisation internationale, dans le cas où un accord visant la collecte de ces renseignements a été conclu en vertu du paragraphe 66(1);
















(2) Section 54 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









(2) L’article 54 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Destruction of certain information



(2) The Centre shall destroy any information contained in a document, whether in written form or in any other form, that it receives that purports to be a report made under section 7, 7.1, 9 or 12, made in accordance with a directive issued under Part 1.1, sent under subsection 14(5) or referred to in section 9.1, and that it determines, in the normal course of its activities, relates to a financial transaction or circumstance that is not required to be reported to the Centre under this Act, and shall destroy any information voluntarily provided to the Centre by the public that it determines, in the normal course of its activities, is not about suspicions of money laundering or the financing of terrorist activities. The Centre shall destroy the information within a reasonable time after the determination is made.









(2) Le Centre détruit dans un délai raisonnable les renseignements qu’il a reçus qui se trouvent dans un document — quel qu’en soit la forme ou le support — et qui sont présentés comme un rapport ou une déclaration visé aux articles 7, 7.1, 9 ou 12, une directive donnée au titre de la partie 1.1, une déclaration incomplète transmise conformément au paragraphe 14(5) ou un rapport visé à l’article 9.1 lorsqu’il conclut, dans le cours normal de ses activités, que ces renseignements se rapportent à une opération financière ou à un cas dont la présente loi n’exige pas qu’ils lui soient communiqués dans un rapport ou une déclaration ou, si ces renseignements lui sont fournis volontairement par le public, qu’ils ne se rapportent pas à des soupçons de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou de financement des activités terroristes.



Destruction de certains renseignements










2006, c. 12, s. 25



281. Subsection 54.1(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:









281. Le paragraphe 54.1(5) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, art. 25










Analysis of information



(5) The Centre may analyse and assess the information referred to in subsection (4) and, in that case, that analysis or assessment is deemed to be an analysis or assessment conducted under paragraph 54(1)(c).









(5) Il peut analyser et apprécier les renseignements visés au paragraphe (4), auquel cas, cette analyse ou cette appréciation est réputée être faite en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c).



Analyse et appréciation










2006, c. 12, s. 26(1)



282. (1) The portion of subsection 55(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









282. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 55(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 26(1)










Disclosure by Centre prohibited



55. (1) Subject to subsections (3) and (6.1), sections 52, 55.1, 56.1 and 56.2, subsection 58(1) and sections 65 to 65.1 and 68.1 of this Act and to subsection 12(1) of the Privacy Act, the Centre shall not disclose the following:









55. (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (3) et (6.1), des articles 52, 55.1, 56.1 et 56.2, du paragraphe 58(1) et des articles 65 à 65.1 et 68.1 de la présente loi et du paragraphe 12(1) de la Loi sur la protection des renseignements personnels, il est interdit au Centre de communiquer les renseignements :



Interdiction : Centre










2001, c. 41, s. 67(5)



(2) The portion of subsection 55(3) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 55(3) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 41, par. 67(5)










Disclosure of designated information



(3) If the Centre, on the basis of its analysis and assessment under paragraph 54(1)(c), has reasonable grounds to suspect that designated information would be relevant to investigating or prosecuting a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, the Centre shall disclose the information to









(3) S’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner, à la lumière de l’analyse et de l’appréciation faite en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c), qu’ils seraient utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou à une infraction de financement des activités terroristes, le Centre communique les renseignements désignés :



Renseignements désignés










2010, c. 12, s. 1874



(3) Paragraph 55(3)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 55(3)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1874












(b) the Canada Revenue Agency, if the Centre also has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to investigating or prosecuting an offence of obtaining or attempting to obtain a rebate, refund or credit to which a person or entity is not entitled, or of evading or attempting to evade paying taxes or duties imposed under an Act of Parliament administered by the Minister of National Revenue;









b) à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, si en outre il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que les renseignements seraient utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction, consommée ou non, relative à l’obtention illicite d’un remboursement ou d’un crédit ou à l’évasion fiscale, y compris le non-paiement de droits, définie par une loi fédérale dont l’application relève du ministre du Revenu national;














(4) Paragraph 55(3)(c) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of subparagraph (i), by adding “or” at the end of subparagraph (ii) and by adding the following after subparagraph (ii):









(4) L’alinéa 55(3)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(iii) whether a person or entity that the Centre has reasonable grounds to suspect may apply to be a registered charity, as defined in subsection 248(1) of the Income Tax Act,






(A) has made or will make available any resources, directly or indirectly, to a listed entity as defined in subsection 83.01(1) of the Criminal Code,






(B) has made available any resources, directly or indirectly, to an entity as defined in subsection 83.01(1) of the Criminal Code that was at that time, and continues to be, engaged in terrorist activities as defined in that subsection or activities in support of them, or






(C) has made or will make available any resources, directly or indirectly, to an entity as defined in subsection 83.01(1) of the Criminal Code that engages or will engage in terrorist activities as defined in that subsection or activities in support of them;









c) à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, si en outre il soupçonne, pour des motifs raisonnables, que les renseignements sont utiles :






(i) pour établir si un organisme de bienfaisance enregistré au sens du paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu a cessé de se conformer aux exigences de cette loi relatives à son enregistrement comme tel,






(ii) pour établir l’admissibilité au statut d’organisme de bienfaisance enregistré au sens de ce paragraphe de toute personne ou entité qu’il soupçonne, pour des motifs raisonnables, d’avoir fait une demande d’enregistrement à cet effet,






(iii) pour établir qu’une personne ou une entité qu’il soupçonne, pour des motifs raisonnables, de pouvoir faire une demande d’enregistrement comme organisme de bienfaisance enregistré au sens du paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu, selon le cas :






(A) a mis ou mettra, directement ou indirectement, des ressources à la disposition d’une entité inscrite au sens du paragraphe 83.01(1) du Code criminel,






(B) a mis, directement ou indirectement, des ressources à la disposition d’une entité au sens de ce paragraphe 83.01(1), qui se livrait à ce moment et se livre encore à des activités terroristes au sens de ce paragraphe ou à des activités visant à les appuyer,






(C) a mis ou mettra, directement ou indirectement, des ressources à la disposition d’une entité inscrite, au sens de ce paragraphe 83.01(1), qui se livre ou se livrera à des activités visées au sous-alinéa (B);












2006, c. 12, s. 26(4)



(5) Paragraphs 55(3)(d) and (e) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(5) Les alinéas 55(3)d) et e) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 26(4)












(d) the Canada Border Services Agency, if the Centre also determines that the information is relevant to determining whether a person is a person described in sections 34 to 42 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act or is relevant to an offence under any of sections 91, 117 to 119, 126 or 127 of that Act;






(e) the Canada Border Services Agency, if the Centre also determines that the information is relevant to investigating or prosecuting an offence of smuggling or attempting to smuggle goods subject to duties or an offence related to the importation or exportation of goods that are prohibited, controlled or regulated under the Customs Act or under any other Act of Parliament; and









d) à l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada, si en outre il estime que les renseignements sont utiles pour établir si une personne est visée aux articles 34 à 42 de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés ou qu’ils se rapportent à une infraction prévue aux articles 91, 117 à 119, 126 et 127 de cette loi;






e) à l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada, si en outre il estime que les renseignements sont utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction qui consiste dans la contrebande — ou la tentative de contrebande — de marchandises passibles de droits ou à une infraction qui a trait à des marchandises dont l’importation ou l’exportation est prohibée, contrôlée ou réglementée en vertu de la Loi sur les douanes ou de toute autre loi fédérale;














(6) Section 55 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (6):









(6) L’article 55 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (6), de ce qui suit :












Publication



(6.1) After a person has been determined by a court to be guilty of a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, or has been determined by a foreign court to be guilty of an offence that is substantially similar to either of those offences, whether on accept-ance of a plea of guilty or on a finding of guilt, the Centre may, if it has disclosed designated information under subsection (3) with respect to the investigation or prosecution of the offence, make public the fact that it made such a disclosure.









(6.1) Lorsqu’un tribunal déclare qu’une personne est coupable d’une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou d’une infraction de financement des activités terroristes ou qu’un tribunal étranger déclare qu’une personne est coupable d’une infraction essentiellement similaire, soit par acceptation de son plaidoyer de culpabilité soit par une déclaration de culpabilité, si le Centre a communiqué des renseignements désignés visés au paragraphe (3) se rapportant à l’enquête ou à la poursuite de cette infraction, il peut rendre ce fait public.



Publication










2006, c. 12, s. 26(5)



(7) Paragraph 55(7)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(7) L’alinéa 55(7)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 26(5)












(a) the name of any person or entity that is involved in the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation or of any person or entity acting on their behalf, as well as the occupation or business and gender of those persons and the business of those entities;









a) le nom de toute personne ou entité qui participe à l’opération financière, à l’importation ou à l’exportation ou de toute personne ou entité agissant pour son compte, ainsi que le sexe et la profession, le métier ou l’entreprise de ces personnes et l’entreprise de ces entités;












2006, c. 12, s. 26(6)



(8) Paragraph 55(7)(k) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(8) L’alinéa 55(7)k) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 26(6)












(k) the grounds on which a person or entity made a report under section 7 about the transaction or attempted transaction and any action taken by the person or entity as a result of the suspicions that led them to make the report;









k) les motifs sur lesquels une personne ou entité s’est fondée pour faire une déclaration visée à l’article 7 concernant l’opération financière et toute mesure qu’elle a prise sur la base des soupçons qui l’ont menée à faire la déclaration;














(9) Subsection 55(7) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (m) and by adding the following after paragraph (n):









(9) Le paragraphe 55(7) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa n), de ce qui suit :














(o) information about the importation or exportation that was reported to the Centre under section 20;






(p) if the transaction is carried out by means of an electronic funds transfer as defined in the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Regulations, information about the transaction that is contained in a report made under section 9 and that is remittance information as defined by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication; and






(q) information about the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation, received by the Centre from an institution or agency under an agreement or arrangement referred to in section 56, that constitutes the institution’s or agency’s reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to investigating or prosecuting a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, or an offence that is substantially similar to either offence.









o) les renseignements relatifs à l’importation ou à l’exportation qui figurent dans le rapport visé à l’article 20;






p) lorsqu’il s’agit d’un télévirement au sens du Règlement sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, les renseignements relatifs à une opération financière contenus dans une déclaration visée à l’article 9 s’ils sont des précisions relatives au paiement au client bénéficiaire, au sens donné à ce terme par la Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication;






q) les renseignements relatifs à l’opération financière effectuée ou tentée, à l’importation ou à l’exportation qui sont reçus par le Centre par l’entremise d’un organisme en vertu d’un accord visé à l’article 56 et sur lesquels reposent les motifs raisonnables de cet organisme de soupçonner qu’ils seraient utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou à une infraction de financement des activités terroristes, ou à une infraction essentiellement similaire.












2001, c. 41, s. 68



283. (1) Subsection 55.1(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









283. (1) Le paragraphe 55.1(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 41, art. 68










Disclosure — threats to security of Canada



55.1 (1) If the Centre, on the basis of its analysis and assessment under paragraph 54(1)(c), has reasonable grounds to suspect that designated information would be relevant to threats to the security of Canada, the Centre shall disclose the information to








(a) the Canadian Security Intelligence Serv-ice;








(b) the appropriate police force, if the Centre also has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information is relevant to investigating or prosecuting an offence under Canadian law that the Centre has reasonable grounds to suspect arises out of conduct constituting such a threat;








(c) the Canada Border Services Agency, if the Centre also has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information is relevant to determining whether a person is a person described in sections 34 to 42 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act or is relevant to an offence under any of sections 91, 117 to 119, 126 or 127 of that Act; and








(d) the Canada Border Services Agency, if the Centre also has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information is relevant to investigating or prosecuting an offence of smuggling or attempting to smuggle goods subject to duties or an offence related to the importation or exportation of goods that are prohibited, controlled or regulated under the Customs Act or under any other Act of Parliament.









55.1 (1) S’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner, à la lumière de l’analyse et de l’appréciation faite en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c), que les renseignements désignés se rapporteraient à des menaces envers la sécurité du Canada, le Centre communique ces renseignements :



Communication — menaces envers la sécurité du Canada




a) au Service canadien du renseignement de sécurité;








b) aux forces policières compétentes, si en outre il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que les renseignements sont utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction en droit canadien dont il a des motifs de soupçonner qu’il se rapporte à des activités constituant une telle menace;








c) à l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada, si en outre il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que les renseignements sont utiles afin d’établir si une personne est visée par les articles 34 à 42 de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés ou qu’ils se rapportent à toute infraction prévue à l’un des articles 91, 117 à 119, 126 et 127 de cette loi;








d) à l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada, si en outre il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que les renseignements sont utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction qui consiste dans la contrebande — ou la tentative de contrebande — de marchandises passibles de droits ou à une infraction qui a trait à des marchandises dont l’importation ou l’exportation est prohibée, contrôlée ou réglementée en vertu de la Loi sur les douanes ou de toute autre loi fédérale.














2006, c. 12, s. 27(1)



(2) Paragraph 55.1(3)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 55.1(3)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 27(1)












(a) the name of any person or entity that is involved in the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation or of any person or entity acting on their behalf, as well as the occupation or business and gender of those persons and the business of those entities;









a) le nom de toute personne ou entité qui participe à l’opération financière, à l’importation ou à l’exportation ou de toute personne ou entité agissant pour son compte, ainsi que le sexe et la profession, le métier ou l’entreprise de ces personnes et l’entreprise de ces entités;












2006, c. 12, s. 27(2)



(3) Paragraph 55.1(3)(k) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 55.1(3)k) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 27(2)












(k) the grounds on which a person or entity made a report under section 7 about the transaction or attempted transaction and any action taken by the person or entity as a result of the suspicions that led them to make the report;









k) les motifs sur lesquels une personne ou entité s’est fondée pour faire une déclaration visée à l’article 7 concernant l’opération financière et toute mesure qu’elle a prise sur la base des soupçons qui l’ont menée à faire la déclaration;












2006, c. 12, s. 27(2)



(4) Subsection 55.1(3) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (m) and by replacing paragraph (n) with the following:









(4) L’alinéa 55.1(3)n) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 27(2)












(n) indicators of a money laundering offence, a terrorist activity financing offence or a threat to the security of Canada related to the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation;






(o) information about the importation or exportation that was reported to the Centre under section 20;






(p) if the transaction is carried out by means of an electronic funds transfer as defined in the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Regulations, information about the transaction that is contained in a report made under section 9 and that is remittance information as defined by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication; and






(q) information about the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation, received by the Centre from an institution or agency under an agreement or arrangement referred to in section 56, that constitutes the institution’s or agency’s reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to investigating or prosecuting a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, or an offence that is substantially similar to either offence.









n) les indices de toute infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité, d’infraction de financement des activités terroristes ou de menaces envers la sécurité du Canada entachant l’opération financière, l’importation ou l’exportation;






o) les renseignements relatifs à l’importation ou à l’exportation qui figurent dans le rapport visé à l’article 20;






p) lorsqu’il s’agit d’un télévirement au sens du Règlement sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, les renseignements relatifs à une opération financière contenus dans une déclaration visée à l’article 9, s’ils sont des précisions relatives au paiement au client bénéficiaire, au sens donné à ce terme par la Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication;






q) les renseignements relatifs à l’opération financière effectuée ou tentée, à l’importation ou à l’exportation qui sont reçus par le Centre par l’entremise d’un organisme en vertu d’un accord visé à l’article 56 et sur lesquels reposent les motifs raisonnables de cet organisme de soupçonner qu’ils seraient utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou à une infraction de financement des activités terroristes, ou à une infraction essentiellement similaire.












2001, c. 41, s. 68; 2006, c. 12, s. 28(1)(E)



284. (1) Subsection 56.1(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









284. (1) Le paragraphe 56.1(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 41, art. 68; 2006, ch. 12, par. 28(1)(A)










Other disclosure



(3) In order to perform its functions under paragraph 54(1)(c), the Centre may direct queries to an institution or agency in respect of which an agreement or arrangement referred to in paragraph (1)(b) or (2)(b) has been entered into, and in doing so it may disclose designated information.









(3) Dans le but d’exercer ses attributions au titre de l’alinéa 54(1)c), le Centre peut présenter des demandes de renseignements à un organisme partie à un accord visé aux alinéas (1)b) ou (2)b) et, ce faisant, peut communiquer des renseignements désignés.



Autre communication












(2) Section 56.1 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (4):









(2) L’article 56.1 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (4), de ce qui suit :












Publication



(4.1) After a person has been determined by a court to be guilty of a money laundering offence or a terrorist activity financing offence, or has been determined by a foreign court to be guilty of an offence that is substantially similar to either offence, whether on acceptance of a plea of guilty or on a finding of guilt, the Centre may, if it has disclosed designated information under subsection (1) or (2) with respect to the investigation or prosecution of the offence, make public the fact that it made such a disclosure.









(4.1) Lorsqu’un tribunal déclare qu’une personne est coupable d’une infraction de recyclage des produits de la criminalité ou d’une infraction de financement des activités terroristes ou qu’un tribunal étranger déclare qu’une personne est coupable d’une infraction essentiellement similaire, soit par acceptation de son plaidoyer de culpabilité soit par une déclaration de culpabilité, si le Centre a communiqué des renseignements désignés visés aux paragraphes (1) ou (2) se rapportant à l’enquête ou à la poursuite de cette infraction, il peut rendre ce fait public.



Publication










2006, c. 12, s. 28(2)



(3) Paragraph 56.1(5)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 56.1(5)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 28(2)












(a) the name of any person or entity that is involved in the transaction, attempted transaction, importation or exportation or of any person or entity acting on their behalf, as well as the person’s occupation or business and gender and the entity’s business;









a) le nom de toute personne ou entité qui participe à l’opération financière, à l’importation ou à l’exportation ou de toute personne ou entité agissant pour son compte, ainsi que le sexe et la profession, le métier ou l’entreprise de ces personnes et l’entreprise de ces entités;












2006, c. 12, s. 28(3)



(4) Paragraph 56.1(5)(k) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) L’alinéa 56.1(5)k) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 28(3)












(k) the grounds on which a person or entity made a report under section 7 about the transaction or attempted transaction and any action taken by the person or entity as a result of the suspicions that led them to make the report;









k) les motifs sur lesquels une personne ou entité s’est fondée pour faire une déclaration visée à l’article 7 concernant l’opération financière et toute mesure qu’elle a prise sur la base des soupçons qui l’ont menée à faire la déclaration;














(5) Subsection 56.1(5) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (m) and by adding the following after paragraph (n):









(5) Le paragraphe 56.1(5) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa n), de ce qui suit :














(o) information about the importation or exportation that was reported to the Centre under section 20; and






(p) if the transaction is carried out by means of an electronic funds transfer as defined in the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Regulations, information about the transaction that is contained in a report made under section 9 and that is remittance information as defined by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication.









o) les renseignements relatifs à l’importation ou à l’exportation qui figurent dans le rapport visé à l’article 20;






p) lorsqu’il s’agit d’un télévirement au sens du Règlement sur le recyclage des produits de la criminalité et le financement des activités terroristes, les renseignements relatifs à une opération financière contenus dans une déclaration visée à l’article 9, s’ils sont des précisions relatives au paiement au client bénéficiaire, au sens donné à ce terme par la Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication.














285. Subsection 58(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









285. Le paragraphe 58(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Limitation



(2) The Centre shall not disclose under subsection (1) any information that would directly or indirectly identify an individual who provided a report or information to the Centre, or a person or an entity about whom a report or information was provided.









(2) Toutefois, le Centre ne peut divulguer aucun renseignement visé au paragraphe (1) qui permettrait d’identifier, même indirectement, l’individu qui a présenté une déclaration ou communiqué des renseignements au Centre ou une personne ou entité à l’égard de qui une déclaration a été faite ou des renseignements ont été communiqués.



Restrictions










2010, c. 12, s. 1876



286. Section 58.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









286. L’article 58.1 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, art. 1876










Centre may disclose information to Minister



58.1 (1) The Centre may, at the request of the Minister, disclose information received or collected by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(a) or (b), or any analysis conducted by the Centre under paragraph 54(1)(c), to author-ities specified by the Minister for the purpose of assisting the Minister in carrying out the Minister’s powers and duties under Part 1.1.









58.1 (1) Afin d’aider le ministre à exercer les attributions que lui confère la partie 1.1, le Centre peut, sur demande du ministre, communiquer les renseignements qu’il a recueillis en application des alinéas 54(1)a) ou b) — ou les analyses qu’il a effectuées en application de l’alinéa 54(1)c) — aux autorités désignées par le ministre.



Divulgation de certains renseignements










Limitation



(2) The Centre shall not disclose under subsection (1) any information that would directly or indirectly identify any person or entity other than a foreign entity as defined in section 11.41.









(2) Toutefois, le Centre ne peut divulguer aucun renseignement visé au paragraphe (1) qui permettrait d’identifier, même indirectement, une personne ou une entité, à l’exception d’une entité étrangère, au sens de l’article 11.41.



Exception










2010, c. 12, par. 1882(d)



287. (1) Subsection 65(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









287. (1) Le paragraphe 65(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, al. 1882d)










Disclosure to law enforcement agencies



65. (1) The Centre may disclose to the appropriate law enforcement agencies any information of which it becomes aware under subsection (4) or section 62, 63 or 63.1 and that it suspects on reasonable grounds would be relevant to investigating or prosecuting an offence under this Act arising out of a contravention of Part 1 or 1.1.









65. (1) Le Centre peut communiquer aux organismes compétents chargés de l’application de la loi tout renseignement dont il prend connaissance au titre du paragraphe (4) ou des articles 62, 63 ou 63.1 et qu’il soupçonne, pour des motifs raisonnables, seraient utiles aux fins d’enquête ou de poursuite relativement à une infraction prévue par la présente loi qui est liée à une contravention aux parties 1 ou 1.1.



Organismes chargés de l’application de la loi












(2) Section 65 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):









(2) L’article 65 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (3), de ce qui suit :












Compliance of persons or entities



(4) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with Parts 1 and 1.1, the Centre shall receive information voluntarily provided to it by a person or entity — other than an agency or body referred to in subsection (2) — relating to the compliance with Part 1 or 1.1 of persons or entities referred to in section 5.









(4) Afin d’assurer l’observation des parties 1 et 1.1, le Centre reçoit tout renseignement qui lui est communiqué volontairement par une personne ou entité — à l’exception des organismes visés au paragraphe (2) — et qui se rapporte à l’observation de l’une ou l’autre de ces parties par les personnes et entités visées à l’article 5.



Observation par les personnes et entités












288. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 65:









288. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 65, de ce qui suit :












Disclosure to Canada Revenue Agency



65.01 (1) The Centre may disclose to the Canada Revenue Agency information relating to the compliance with Part 1 of persons or entities referred to in section 5 if the Centre has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to the initial implementation of policies respecting the reporting of international electronic funds transfers to the Canada Revenue Agency.









65.01 (1) S’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que des renseignements se rapportant à l’observation de la partie 1 par des personnes ou des entités visées à l’article 5 seraient utiles en vue de la mise en oeuvre de politiques concernant la déclaration des télévirements internationaux à l’Agence du revenu du Canada, le Centre peut les communiquer à l’Agence du revenu du Canada.



Communication à l’Agence du revenu du Canada










Limitation



(2) Any information disclosed by the Centre under subsection (1) may be used by the Canada Revenue Agency only for purposes relating to the initial implementation of the policies referred to in that subsection or to ensuring compliance with any provision of the Income Tax Act that requires the reporting of international electronic funds transfers to the Canada Revenue Agency.









(2) Les renseignements communiqués par le Centre au titre du paragraphe (1) ne peuvent être utilisés par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qu’aux fins de la mise en oeuvre des politiques visées à ce paragraphe ou du contrôle d’application de toute disposition de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu exigeant la déclaration des télévirements internationaux à l’Agence du revenu du Canada.



Limite










Limitation



(3) The Centre shall not disclose any information under subsection (1) that would directly or indirectly identify a client of a person or entity referred to in section 5.









(3) Le Centre ne peut divulguer aucun renseignement visé au paragraphe (1) qui permettrait d’identifier, même indirectement, un client d’une personne ou entité visée à l’article 5.



Limite












289. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 65.01:









289. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 65.01, de ce qui suit :












Disclosure to Canada Revenue Agency



65.02 (1) The Centre may disclose to the Canada Revenue Agency information relating to the compliance with Part 1 of persons or entities referred to in section 5 if the Centre has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would be relevant to ensuring compliance with Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act.









65.02 (1) S’il a des motifs raisonnables de soupçonner que des renseignements se rapportant à l’observation de la partie 1 par des personnes ou des entités visées à l’article 5 seraient utiles pour assurer l’observation de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu, le Centre peut les communiquer à l’Agence du revenu du Canada.



Communication à l’Agence du revenu du Canada










Limitation



(2) Any information disclosed by the Centre under subsection (1) may be used by the Canada Revenue Agency only for purposes relating to ensuring compliance with Part XV.1 of the Income Tax Act.









(2) Les renseignements communiqués par le Centre au titre du paragraphe (1) ne peuvent être utilisés par l’Agence du revenu du Canada qu’à des fins relatives au contrôle d’application de la partie XV.1 de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.



Limite










Limitation



(3) The Centre shall not disclose any information under subsection (1) that would directly or indirectly identify a client of a person or entity referred to in section 5.









(3) Le Centre ne peut divulguer aucun renseignement visé au paragraphe (1) qui permettrait d’identifier, même indirectement, un client d’une personne ou entité visée à l’article 5.



Limite












290. Subsections 66(1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:









290. Les paragraphes 66(1) et (2) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Power to enter into



66. (1) The Centre may, for the purpose of exercising its powers or performing its duties and functions under this Part, enter into contracts, memoranda of understanding and other agreements with a department or an agency of the Government of Canada, with the government of a province, with the government of a foreign state and with any other person or organization, whether inside or outside Canada, in its own name or in the name of Her Majesty in right of Canada.









66. (1) En vue de l’exercice des attributions qui lui sont conférées par la présente partie, le Centre peut conclure avec tout ministère ou tout organisme du gouvernement fédéral ou avec un gouvernement provincial, le gouvernement d’un État étranger ou toute autre personne ou organisation, au Canada ou à l’étranger, des accords sous le nom de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ou le sien.



Conclusion d’accords










Agreements re databases



(2) Agreements relating to the Centre’s collection of information from databases referred to in paragraph 54(1)(b) must specify the nature of and limits with respect to the information that the Centre may collect from those databases.









(2) Tout accord relatif à la collecte, par le Centre, de renseignements contenus dans des bases de données visées à l’alinéa 54(1)b) précise la nature des renseignements qui peuvent être recueillis et les limites qui s’imposent à leur égard.



Bases de données












291. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 68:









291. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 68, de ce qui suit :












Filing of documents



68.1 The Centre may, for the purpose of any action, suit or other legal proceedings brought or taken under this Act, file with the court any documents containing information referred to in subsection 55(1).









68.1 Dans toute procédure judiciaire engagée sous le régime de la présente loi, le Centre peut déposer auprès du tribunal des documents contenant des renseignements visés au paragraphe 55(1).



Dépôt de documents












292. Subsection 71(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









292. Le paragraphe 71(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Contents



(2) The report referred to in subsection (1) shall include








(a) a description of the management guidelines and policies of the Centre for the protection of human rights and freedoms; and








(b) information on the performance by the Centre of its duties and functions, including any statistics by which that performance is measured.









(2) Le rapport comprend notamment :



Contenu




a) une description des lignes directrices et politiques de gestion du Centre portant sur la protection des droits et libertés de la personne;








b) des renseignements sur le rendement du Centre dans l’exercice de ses fonctions, notamment des données statistiques qui permettent de mesurer ce rendement.
















293. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 72:









293. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 72, de ce qui suit :












Service of Notices









signification












Authorized person



72.1 The service of a notice by or on behalf of the Centre on a person or entity referred to in paragraph 5(h.1) is sufficient if it is served on the person who is indicated in the application for registration, or in accordance with subsection 11.13(1), as being authorized to accept, on behalf of the person or entity referred to in that paragraph, notices that are served or caused to be served by the Centre under this Act.









72.1 S’agissant d’une personne ou entité visée à l’alinéa 5h.1), il suffit, pour que les avis soient considérés comme signifiés par le Centre ou à sa demande, qu’ils soient signifiés à la personne dont le nom est indiqué dans la demande d’inscription — ou qui est fourni conformément au paragraphe 11.13(1) — qui est autorisée à accepter, au nom de la personne ou entité visée à cet alinéa, des avis signifiés par le Centre en vertu de la présente loi ou que celui-ci fait signifier en vertu de celle-ci.



Personne autorisée












294. (1) Paragraph 73(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









294. (1) L’alinéa 73(1)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) describing services for the purpose of subparagraph 5(h)(v) or (h.1)(v) and activities for the purpose of businesses, professions and activities for the purpose of paragraph 5(i);









a) déterminer les services visés aux sous-alinéas 5h)(v) et h.1)(v) et les entreprises, les professions et les activités visées à l’alinéa 5i);












2001, c. 41, s. 73(1)



(2) Paragraph 73(1)(g) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 73(1)g) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 41, par. 73(1)












(g) defining “courier” and “monetary instruments”;









g) définir les termes « effets » et « messager »;














(3) Subsection 73(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (g):









(3) La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’alinéa 73(1)g), de ce qui suit :














(g.1) for the purposes of subparagraphs 5(h)(iv) and (h.1)(iv), defining “deal in”, in relation to virtual currencies, and “virtual currencies”;









g.1) définir, pour l’application des sous-alinéas 5h)(iv) et h.1)(iv) les termes « commerce », relativement à la monnaie virtuelle, et « monnaie virtuelle »;












2006, c. 12, s. 39(2)



(4) Paragraphs 73(1)(j) to (l) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(4) Les alinéas 73(1)j) à l) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 39(2)












(j) prescribing, for the purposes of subsection 9.3(1), the manner for determining whether a person is a person described in any of paragraphs 9.3(1)(a) to (c) and the circumstances in which it is necessary to make that determination;






(k) prescribing, for the purposes of subsections 9.3(2) and (2.1), the circumstances in which it is necessary to obtain the approval of senior management and the measures to be taken;






(l) prescribing offices and positions for the purposes of paragraph (j) of the definition “politically exposed domestic person” in subsection 9.3(3) or paragraph (j) of the definition “politically exposed foreign person” in that subsection;






(l.1) prescribing family members for the purposes of subsection 9.3(1);






(l.2) defining “foreign state” for the purposes of the definition “politically exposed foreign person” in subsection 9.3(3);









j) prévoir, pour l’application du paragraphe 9.3(1), la façon d’établir si une personne est visée aux alinéas 9.3(1)a) à c) et les circonstances dans lesquelles il est nécessaire de l’établir;






k) prévoir, pour l’application des paragraphes 9.3(2) et (2.1), les cas où l’agrément de la haute direction est nécessaire et les mesures à prendre;






l) prévoir les postes ou charges pour l’application de l’alinéa j) de la définition de « étranger politiquement vulnérable » au paragraphe 9.3(3) ou de l’alinéa j) de la définition de « national politiquement vulnérable » à ce paragraphe;






l.1) préciser les membres de la famille visés au paragraphe 9.3(1);






l.2) définir « État étranger » pour l’application de la définition de « étranger politiquement vulnérable » au paragraphe 9.3(3);












2006, c. 12, s. 39(2)



(5) Paragraph 73(1)(o) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(5) L’alinéa 73(1)o) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 12, par. 39(2)












(o) prescribing the services referred to in the definition “correspondent banking relationship” in subsections 9.31(2) and 9.4(3);









o) prévoir les services visés par l’expression « relation de correspondant bancaire » aux paragraphes 9.31(2) et 9.4(3);












2010, c. 12, s. 1877



(6) Paragraphs 73(1)(y.1) and (y.2) of the Act are repealed.









(6) Les alinéas 73(1)y.1) et y.2) de la même loi sont abrogés.



2010, ch. 12, art. 1877










2010, c. 12, s. 1878(1)



295. The portion of subsection 74(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









295. Le passage du paragraphe 74(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2010, ch. 12, par. 1878(1)










General offences



74. (1) Every person or entity that knowingly contravenes any of sections 6, 6.1 and 9.1 to 9.3, subsection 9.4(2), sections 9.5 to 9.7, 11.1, 11.43, 11.44 and 11.6, subsections 12(1) and (4) and 36(1), section 37, subsections 55(1) and (2), section 57 and subsections 62(2), 63.1(2) and 64(3) or the regulations is guilty of an offence and liable









74. (1) Toute personne ou entité qui contrevient sciemment à l’un ou l’autre des articles 6, 6.1 et 9.1 à 9.3, du paragraphe 9.4(2), des articles 9.5 à 9.7, 11.1, 11.43, 11.44 et 11.6, des paragraphes 12(1) et (4) et 36(1), de l’article 37, des paragraphes 55(1) et (2), de l’article 57 et des paragraphes 62(2), 63.1(2) et 64(3) ou aux règlements commet une infraction passible, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infractions générales












296. The portion of subsection 74(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









296. Le passage du paragraphe 74(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












General offences



74. (1) Every person or entity that knowingly contravenes any of sections 6, 6.1 and 9.1 to 9.31, subsection 9.4(2), sections 9.5 to 9.7, 11.1, 11.43, 11.44 and 11.6, subsections 12(1) and (4) and 36(1), section 37, subsections 55(1) and (2), section 57 and subsections 62(2), 63.1(2) and 64(3) or the regulations is guilty of an offence and liable









74. (1) Toute personne ou entité qui contrevient sciemment à l’un ou l’autre des articles 6, 6.1 et 9.1 à 9.31, du paragraphe 9.4(2), des articles 9.5 à 9.7, 11.1, 11.43, 11.44 et 11.6, des paragraphes 12(1) et (4) et 36(1), de l’article 37, des paragraphes 55(1) et (2), de l’article 57 et des paragraphes 62(2), 63.1(2) et 64(3) ou aux règlements commet une infraction passible, sur déclaration de culpabilité :



Infractions générales








2010, c. 12



Jobs and Economic Growth Act









Loi sur l’emploi et la croissance économique



2010, ch.12












297. Section 1884 of the Jobs and Economic Growth Act is replaced by the following:









297. L’article 1884 de la Loi sur l’emploi et la croissance économique est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Royal assent of Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1



1884. The provisions of this Part, other than sections 1874 and 1875, are deemed to have come into force immediately before the day on which the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 receives royal assent.









1884. Les dispositions de la présente partie, à l’exception des articles 1874 et 1875, sont réputées être entrées en vigueur immédiatement avant la date de sanction de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Sanction royale de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014










Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












One year after royal assent



298. (1) Section 260 comes into force one year after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









298. (1) L’article 260 entre en vigueur un an après la date de la sanction de la présente loi.



Un an après la sanction royale










January 1, 2015



(2) Section 289 comes into force on January 1, 2015.









(2) L’article 289 entre en vigueur le 1er janvier 2015.



1er janvier 2015










Order in council



(3) Subsections 256(2) and (3), sections 257, 258 and 261, subsection 262(3) and sections 263 to 266 and 293, subsections 294(1) to (5) and section 296 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









(3) Les paragraphes 256(2) et (3), les articles 257, 258, 261, le paragraphe 262(3), les articles 263 à 266 et 293, les paragraphes 294(1) à (5) et l’article 296 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












Division 20









Section 20












Immigration









Immigration










2001, c. 27



Immigration and Refugee Protection Act









Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés



2001, ch. 27










2012, c. 19, s. 701; 2013, c. 40, subpar. 238(1)(h)(i)



299. Subsection 4(2.1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act is replaced by the following:









299. Le paragraphe 4(2.1) de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 19, art. 701; 2013, ch. 40, s.-al. 238(1)h)(i)










Minister of Employment and Social Development



(2.1) In making regulations under paragraphs 32(d.1) to (d.4), the Governor in Council may confer powers and duties on the Minister of Employment and Social Development.









(2.1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, dans tout règlement pris en vertu des alinéas 32d.1) à d.4), conférer des attributions au ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social.



Compétence du ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social












300. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 11.1:









300. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 11.1, de ce qui suit :












Visa or other document not to be issued



11.2 An officer may not issue a visa or other document in respect of an application for permanent residence to a foreign national who was issued an invitation under Division 0.1 to make that application if — at the time the invitation was issued or at the time the officer received their application — the foreign national did not meet the criteria set out in an instruction given under paragraph 10.3(1)(e) or did not have the qualifications on the basis of which they were ranked under an instruction given under paragraph 10.3(1)(h) and were issued the invitation.









11.2 Ne peut être délivré à l’étranger à qui une invitation à présenter une demande de résidence permanente a été formulée en vertu de la section 0.1 un visa ou autre document à l’égard de la demande si, lorsque l’invitation a été formulée ou que la demande a été reçue par l’agent, il ne répondait pas aux critères prévus dans une instruction donnée en vertu de l’alinéa 10.3(1)e) ou ne satisfaisait pas aux motifs de classement prévus dans une instruction donnée en vertu de l’alinéa 10.3(1)h) sur la base desquels cette invitation a été formulée.



Visa ou autre document ne pouvant être délivré












301. Section 14 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (4):









301. L’article 14 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (4), de ce qui suit :












Applications to be made electronically



(5) The regulations may require foreign nationals who make an application for a visa or other document under subsection 11(1) and foreign nationals who were issued an invitation under Division 0.1 to apply for permanent residence to make those applications by means of an electronic system and may include provisions respecting that system, respecting the circumstances in which those applications may be made by other means and respecting those other means.









(5) Les règlements peuvent exiger des étrangers qui font une demande de visa ou d’autres documents en vertu du paragraphe 11(1) et de ceux à qui une invitation à présenter une demande de résidence permanente a été formulée en vertu de la section 0.1 qu’ils la fassent au moyen d’un système électronique, ainsi que régir ce système et prévoir les cas où les demandes peuvent être faites par tout autre moyen qui y est prévu.



Demandes au moyen d’un système électronique












302. Section 32 of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (d.3):









302. L’article 32 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa d.3), de ce qui suit :














(d.4) a system of administrative monetary penalties applicable to the contravention by an employer of any conditions referred to in paragraph (d.1) and the amounts of those penalties;









d.4) le régime de sanctions administratives pécuniaires applicable aux cas de non-respect par un employeur de toute condition visée à l’alinéa d.1) et le montant des pénalités imposées au titre de ce régime;














303. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 87.4:









303. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 87.4, de ce qui suit :












Federal Investor and Entrepreneur Classes









Catégories fédérales des investisseurs et des entrepreneurs












Pending applications



87.5 (1) An application by a foreign national for a permanent resident visa as a member of the prescribed class of investors or of entrepreneurs is terminated if, before February 11, 2014, it has not been established by an officer, in accordance with the regulations, whether the applicant meets the selection criteria and other requirements applicable to the class in question.









87.5 (1) Il est mis fin à toute demande de visa de résident permanent faite au titre de la catégorie réglementaire des investisseurs ou de celle des entrepreneurs si, au 11 février 2014, un agent n’a pas statué, conformément aux règlements, quant à la conformité de la demande aux critères de sélection et autres exigences applicables à la catégorie en cause.



Demandes pendantes










Application



(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to








(a) an application in respect of which a superior court has made a final determination unless the determination is made on or after February 11, 2014; or








(b) an application made by an investor or entrepreneur who is selected as such by a province whose government has entered into an agreement referred to in subsection 9(1).









(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s’applique pas aux demandes suivantes :



Application




a) celle à l’égard de laquelle une cour supérieure a rendu une décision finale, sauf dans les cas où celle-ci a été rendue le 11 février 2014 ou après cette date;








b) celle faite par un investisseur ou un entrepreneur sélectionné à ce titre par une province ayant conclu un accord visé au paragraphe 9(1).














Effect



(3) The fact that an application is terminated under subsection (1) does not constitute a decision not to issue a permanent resident visa.









(3) Le fait qu’il a été mis fin à une demande de visa de résident permanent par application du paragraphe (1) ne constitue pas un refus de délivrer le visa.



Effet










Fees returned



(4) Any fees paid to the Minister in respect of the application referred to in subsection (1) — including for the acquisition of permanent resident status — must be returned, without interest, to the person who paid them. The amounts payable may be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund.









(4) Les frais versés au ministre à l’égard de la demande visée au paragraphe (1), notamment pour l’acquisition du statut de résident permanent, sont remboursés, sans intérêts, à la personne qui les a acquittés; ils peuvent être payés sur le Trésor.



Remboursement de frais










Investment returned



(5) If an application for a permanent resident visa as a member of the prescribed class of investors is terminated under subsection (1), an amount equal to the investment made by the applicant in respect of their application must be returned, without interest, to the applicant. The amount may be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund.









(5) Une somme égale au placement fait par une personne à l’égard de sa demande de visa de résident permanent faite au titre de la catégorie réglementaire des investisseurs et à laquelle il est mis fin par application du paragraphe (1) lui est remboursée, sans intérêts; elle peut être payée sur le Trésor.



Remboursement du placement










Provincial allocation



(6) If the provincial allocation of an investment made in respect of an application for a permanent resident visa as a member of the prescribed class of investors that is terminated under subsection (1) has been transferred to an approved fund, as defined in subsection 88(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations, the province whose government controls the approved fund must return an amount equal to that provincial allocation to the Minister without delay. The return of the amount extinguishes the debt obligation in respect of that provincial allocation.









(6) Si, à l’égard d’une demande de visa de résident permanent faite au titre de la catégorie réglementaire des investisseurs et à laquelle il est mis fin par application du paragraphe (1), une quote-part provinciale a été transférée à un fonds agréé, au sens du paragraphe 88(1) du Règlement sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés, la province dont le gouvernement contrôle le fonds retourne sans délai au ministre une somme équivalant à la quote-part provinciale, entraînant ainsi l’extinction du titre de créance à l’égard de celle-ci.



Quote-part provinciale










No recourse or indemnity



(7) No right of recourse or indemnity lies against Her Majesty in right of Canada in connection with an application that is terminated under subsection (1), including in respect of any contract or other arrangement relating to any aspect of the application.









(7) Nul n’a de recours contre Sa Majesté du chef du Canada ni droit à une indemnité de sa part relativement à une demande à laquelle il est mis fin par application du paragraphe (1), notamment à l’égard de tout contrat ou autre forme d’entente qui a trait à la demande.



Absence de recours ou d’indemnité












304. Subsection 145(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (b):









304. Le paragraphe 145(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa b), de ce qui suit :














(b.1) the amount of a penalty imposed under any regulation made under paragraph 32(d.4);









b.1) le montant de toute pénalité imposée au titre du règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa 32d.4);














305. Section 146 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









305. L’article 146 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Minister of Employment and Social Development



(1.1) When a penalty is imposed as a result of the Minister of Employment and Social Development exercising a power conferred on him or her by regulation made under paragraph 32(d.4), that Minister is responsible for the recovery of the debt referred to in paragraph 145(1)(b.1).









(1.1) Dans le cas où la pénalité est imposée en raison de l’exercice par le ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social de toute attribution qui lui est conférée par règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa 32d.4), ce ministre est chargé du recouvrement de la créance visée à l’alinéa 145(1)b.1).



Ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social








2013, c. 40



Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2









Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013



2013, ch. 40












306. (1) Section 290 of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 is amended by adding, after the subsection 10.1(2) that it enacts, the following:









306. (1) L’article 290 de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe 10.1(2) qui y est édicté, de ce qui suit :












Provincial nominees



(2.1) In the case of the prescribed class of provincial nominees, an instruction may be given under paragraph 10.3(1)(a) in respect of the foreign nationals who are nominated by the government of a particular province in accord-ance with an agreement referred to in section 8, or in respect of a portion of those foreign nationals.









(2.1) S’agissant de la catégorie réglementaire des candidats des provinces, une instruction peut être donnée en vertu de l’alinéa 10.3(1)a) à l’égard des étrangers qui sont désignés, conformément à un accord visé à l’article 8, par le gouvernement d’une province donnée ou à l’égard d’une portion de ceux-ci.



Candidats des provinces












(2) Section 290 of the Act is amended by replacing the subsection 10.1(6) that it enacts with the following:









(2) L’article 290 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement du paragraphe 10.1(6) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Failure to make application



(6) A foreign national who is invited to make an application and does not do so within the period specified in an instruction given under paragraph 10.3(1)(k) is not eligible to be invited to make an application in relation to the expression of interest on the basis of which the invitation was issued.









(6) L’étranger invité à présenter une demande qui n’en présente pas une dans la période prévue dans une instruction donnée en vertu de l’alinéa 10.3(1)k) ne peut être invité à en présenter une autre relativement à la même déclaration d’intérêt.



Effet de ne pas présenter de demande












(3) Section 290 of the Act is amended by replacing the subsection 10.2(5) that it enacts with the following:









(3) L’article 290 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement du paragraphe 10.2(5) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Cancellation of invitation



(5) The Minister may cancel an invitation to make an application if the invitation was issued in error.









(5) Le ministre peut annuler toute invitation à présenter une demande lorsque l’invitation a été formulée par erreur.



Annulation de l’invitation












(4) Section 290 of the Act is amended by replacing the portion of the subsection 10.3(1) that it enacts before paragraph (a) with the following:









(4) L’article 290 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement du passage du paragraphe 10.3(1) qui précède l’alinéa a) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Instructions



10.3 (1) The Minister may give instructions governing any matter relating to the application of this Division, including instructions respecting









10.3 (1) Le ministre peut donner des instructions régissant l’application de la présente section, notamment des instructions portant sur :



Instructions












(5) Section 290 of the Act is amended by replacing the paragraph 10.3(1)(c) that it enacts with the following:









(5) L’article 290 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’alinéa 10.3(1)c) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :














(c) the submission and processing of an expression of interest, including by means of the electronic system;









c) la soumission et le traitement d’une déclaration d’intérêt, notamment au moyen de ce système;














(6) Section 290 of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of the paragraph 10.3(1)(k) that it enacts, by adding “and” at the end of the paragraph 10.3(1)(l) that it enacts and by adding the following after that paragraph 10.3(1)(l):









(6) L’article 290 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa 10.3(1)l) qui y est édicté, de ce qui suit :














(m) any matter for which a recommendation to the Minister or a decision may or must be made by a designated person, institution or organization with respect to a foreign national.









m) les affaires sur lesquelles les personnes ou organismes désignés devront ou pourront prendre des décisions ou faire des recommandations au ministre sur les étrangers.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



307. Sections 300 and 301 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, which may not be earlier than the day on which section 290 of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 comes into force.









307. Les articles 300 et 301 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret, ces dates ne pouvant toutefois être antérieures à celle de l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 290 de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013.



Décret












Division 21









Section 21












Public Service Labour Relations









Relations de travail dans la fonction publique










2003, c. 22, s. 2



Public Service Labour Relations Act









Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique



2003, ch. 22, art. 2












308. Paragraph 226(1)(h) of the Public Service Labour Relations Act is replaced by the following:









308. L’alinéa 226(1)h) de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(h) if the adjudicator has determined that the employer has engaged in a discriminatory practice set out in section 7, 8, 10 or 14 of the Canadian Human Rights Act,






(i) order that the employer cease the discriminatory practice and take measures to redress the practice or to prevent the same or a similar practice from occurring in the future, or






(ii) give relief in accordance with any of paragraphs 53(2)(b) to (e) or subsection 53(3) of that Act;









h) s’il a décidé que l’employeur a commis un acte discriminatoire prévu aux articles 7, 8, 10 ou 14 de la Loi canadienne sur les droits de la personne :






(i) ordonner à l’employeur de mettre fin à l’acte et de prendre des mesures de redressement ou des mesures destinées à prévenir des actes semblables,






(ii) rendre les ordonnances prévues à l’un des alinéas 53(2)b) à e) ou au paragraphe 53(3) de cette loi;










2013, c. 40



Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2









Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013



2013, ch. 40












309. (1) The portion of subsection 338(4) of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









309. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 338(4) de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Arbitration board established



(4) Subject to subsections (6) and (7), the provisions of the Act, as they read immediately before the commencement day, continue to apply in respect of a bargaining unit that is referred to in paragraph (3)(a) until an arbitral award is made in respect of the bargaining unit if, before the commencement day,









(4) Sous réserve des paragraphes (6) et (7), les dispositions de la Loi, dans leur version antérieure à la date de référence, continuent de s’appliquer à toute unité de négociation visée à l’alinéa (3)a) jusqu’à ce qu’une décision arbitrale soit rendue à son égard, si les conditions ci-après sont réunies avant cette date :



Établissement du conseil d’arbitrage












(2) The portion of subsection 338(5) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 338(5) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Public interest commission established



(5) Subject to subsections (6) and (7), the provisions of the Act, as they read immediately before the commencement day, continue to apply in respect of a bargaining unit that is referred to in paragraph (3)(a) until a collective agreement is entered into by parties if, before the commencement day,









(5) Sous réserve des paragraphes (6) et (7), les dispositions de la Loi, dans leur version antérieure à la date de référence, continuent de s’appliquer à toute unité de négociation visée à l’alinéa (3)a) jusqu’à ce qu’une convention collective soit conclue par les parties, si les conditions ci-après sont réunies avant cette date :



Établissement de la commission de l’intérêt public












(3) Subsection 338(6) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Le paragraphe 338(6) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












No essential services agreement



(6) Despite subsections (4) and (5), if, before the commencement day, arbitration or conciliation has been chosen by the bargaining agent representing a bargaining unit that is referred to in paragraph (3)(a) or (b) as the process for the resolution of disputes to which it may be a party and if, before that day, no essential services agreement has been entered into by the employer and the bargaining agent in relation to that bargaining unit, then,








(a) if no notification referred to in paragraph (4)(b) or (5)(b) had been given before December 12, 2013, the process for the resolution of disputes is conciliation; and








(b) sections 120 and 121 of the Act, as enacted by section 305, apply except that, despite subsection 121(3) of the Act, as enacted by section 305, the notice that is referred to in subsection 121(1) of the Act, as enacted by section 305, must be given not later than 12 months after the commencement day.









(6) Malgré les paragraphes (4) et (5), si, avant la date de référence, l’arbitrage ou la conciliation a été choisi par l’agent négociateur représentant une unité de négociation visée aux alinéas (3)a) ou b) comme mode de règlement des différends applicable à tout différend auquel il peut être partie, mais qu’aucune entente sur les services essentiels n’a été conclue entre celui-ci et l’employeur à l’égard de l’unité de négociation, alors :



Aucune entente sur les services essentiels




a) si, avant le 12 décembre 2013, aucun avis visé aux alinéas (4)b) ou (5)b) n’a été donné, le mode de règlement des différends est la conciliation;








b) les articles 120 et 121 de la Loi, édictés par l’article 305, s’appliquent sauf que, malgré le paragraphe 121(3) de la Loi, édicté par l’article 305, l’employeur a douze mois après la date de référence pour donner l’avis visé au paragraphe 121(1) de la Loi, édicté par cet article 305.
















(4) The portion of subsection 338(7) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(4) Le passage du paragraphe 338(7) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Essential services agreement entered into



(7) Despite subsections (4) and (5), if, before the commencement day, arbitration or conciliation has been chosen by the bargaining agent representing a bargaining unit that is referred to in paragraph (3)(a) or (b) as the process for the resolution of disputes to which it may be a party and if, before that day, an essential services agreement has been entered into by the employer and the bargaining agent in relation to that bargaining unit, then, the process for the resolution of disputes is









(7) Malgré les paragraphes (4) et (5), si, avant la date de référence, l’arbitrage ou la conciliation a été choisi par l’agent négociateur représentant une unité de négociation visée aux alinéas (3)a) ou b) comme mode de règlement des différends applicable à tout différend auquel il peut être partie et qu’une entente sur les services essentiels a été conclue entre celui-ci et l’employeur à l’égard de l’unité de négociation, le mode de règlement applicable à celle-ci est :



Entente sur les services essentiels en vigueur












(5) Section 338 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (7):









(5) L’article 338 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction après le paragraphe (7) de ce qui suit :












Non-application



(7.1) Subsection (7) does not apply if the notification referred to in paragraph (4)(b) or (5)(b) had been given before December 12, 2013.









(7.1) Le paragraphe (7) ne s’applique pas si l’avis visé aux alinéas (4)b) ou (5)b) a été donné avant le 12 décembre 2013.



Précision












(6) Subsection 338(9) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(6) Le paragraphe 338(9) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Positions — essential services agreement



(9) Despite subsections (4) and (5), if a bargaining unit is bound by an essential services agreement immediately before the commencement day,








(a) sections 120 and 121 of the Act, as enacted by section 305, apply except that, despite subsection 121(3) of the Act, as enacted by section 305, the notice that is referred to in subsection 121(1) of the Act, as enacted by section 305, must be given not later than 12 months after the commencement day; and








(b) every position that is identified in the agreement as being necessary for the employer to provide essential services is deemed to be a position designated by the employer under section 120 of the Act, as enacted by section 305.








For greater certainty, subsection 124(1) of the Act, as enacted by section 305, does not apply in respect of any position referred to in paragraph (b).









(9) Malgré les paragraphes (4) et (5), si une unité de négociation est liée par une entente sur les services essentiels avant la date de référence :



Postes — entente sur les services essentiels




a) les articles 120 et 121 de la Loi, édictés par l’article 305, s’appliquent sauf que, malgré le paragraphe 121(3) de la Loi, édicté par l’article 305, l’employeur a douze mois après la date de référence pour donner l’avis visé au paragraphe 121(1) de la Loi, édicté par cet article 305;








b) les postes qui y sont précisés comme étant nécessaires pour permettre à l’employeur de fournir les services essentiels sont réputés des postes désignés en vertu de l’article 120 de la Loi, édicté par l’article 305.








Il est entendu que le paragraphe 124(1) de la Loi, édicté par l’article 305, ne s’applique pas aux postes visés à l’alinéa b).














For greater certainty



(10) For greater certainty,








(a) every essential services agreement between the employer and a bargaining agent that is in force immediately before the commencement day is deemed to have ceased to have effect on the commencement day; and








(b) every essential services agreement that is entered into by the employer and a bargaining agent after the commencement day ceases to apply on the day on which a collective agreement is entered into by the employer and the bargaining agent.









(10) Il est entendu que :



Précision




a) les ententes sur les services essentiels conclues entre l’employeur et un agent négociateur et en vigueur avant la date de référence sont réputées avoir cessé d’avoir effet à cette date;








b) les ententes sur les services essentiels conclues entre l’employeur et un agent négociateur après la date de référence cessent de s’appliquer dès qu’une convention collective est conclue entre eux.














Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Section 308



310. (1) Section 308 comes into force on the day on which subsection 326(1) of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 comes into force.









310. (1) L’article 308 entre en vigueur à la date d’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 326(1) de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013.



Article 308










Section 309



(2) Section 309 is deemed to have come into force on December 12, 2013.









(2) L’article 309 est réputé être entré en vigueur le 12 décembre 2013.



Article 309












Division 22









Section 22










2006, c. 13



Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006









Loi de 2006 sur les droits d’exportation de produits de bois d’oeuvre



2006, ch. 13












311. (1) Section 99 of the Softwood Lumber Products Export Charge Act, 2006 is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









311. (1) L’article 99 de la Loi de 2006 sur les droits d’exportation de produits de bois d’oeuvre est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Calculations



(1.1) The portion of the revenue to be distributed to a province shall be calculated in respect of each fiscal quarter in a fiscal year.









(1.1) La portion des recettes à verser à une province est calculée trimestriellement au cours de tout exercice.



Calculs










Definition of “fiscal year”



(1.2) In subsection (1.1), “fiscal year” means the period beginning on April 1 in one year and ending on March 31 in the next year.









(1.2) Pour l’application du paragraphe (1.1), « exercice » s’entend de la période commençant le 1er avril d’une année et se terminant le 31 mars de l’année suivante.



Définition de « exercice »










Revenue



(1.3) The amount of revenue to be attributed to a province for a fiscal quarter is the revenue derived from the charge imposed under section 10 or 15 on softwood lumber products originating from that province.









(1.3) Les recettes à attribuer à une province pour un trimestre donné sont celles tirées des droits prévus aux articles 10 ou 15 sur les produits de bois d’oeuvre provenant de cette province.



Recettes










Costs



(1.4) The amount of the costs referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) to be attributed to a province for a fiscal quarter is determined by the formula








A × (B/C) + D








where








A      is the costs that the Minister becomes aware of during the fiscal quarter;








B      is the volume in board feet of softwood lumber products exported from the province to the United States during the fiscal quarter under export permits;








C      is the volume in board feet of softwood lumber products exported from all of the provinces to the United States during the fiscal quarter under export permits; and








D      is the total amount of the costs attributed to the province for previous fiscal quarters, including any fiscal quarter that is before the day on which this subsection comes into force, that have not already been deducted from revenue transfers to that province and that have not been previously collected under section 40.1 of the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act or through voluntary payments by that province to Her Majesty in right of Canada.









(1.4) Les frais visés aux alinéas (1)a) et b) à attribuer à une province pour un trimestre donné sont calculés selon la formule suivante :



Frais




A × (B/C) + D








où :








A      représente les frais qui viennent à la connaissance du ministre au cours de ce trimestre;








B      le volume, en pied-planche, de produits de bois d’oeuvre exportés de la province vers les États-Unis au cours de ce trimestre en vertu de licences d’exportation;








C      le volume, en pied-planche, de produits de bois d’oeuvre exportés de toutes les provinces vers les États-Unis au cours de ce trimestre en vertu de licences d’exportation;








D      le montant total des frais attribués à la province pour les trimestres antérieurs, y compris tout trimestre antérieur à la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent paragraphe, qui n’ont pas été déduits des transferts de recettes à la province ni perçus précédemment en vertu de l’article 40.1 de la Loi sur les arrangements fiscaux entre le gouvernement fédéral et les provinces ou au moyen de paiements volontaires faits par la province à Sa Majesté du chef du Canada.














Exception



(1.5) In the case of the costs referred to in paragraph (1)(b), the formula applies unless the Minister determines under subsection (1) that the costs are to be attributed otherwise.









(1.5) Dans le cas des frais visés à l’alinéa (1)b), la formule s’applique à moins que le minis-tre ne décide, au titre du paragraphe (1), d’attribuer les frais autrement.



Exception










Amount equal to or less than zero



(1.6) If, after deducting any refunds and the costs referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) and (b), the resulting amount with respect to a province is equal to or less than zero, the Minister is not required to distribute any portion of the revenue to that province.









(1.6) Si, après les déductions, le montant obtenu est égal ou inférieur à zéro à l’égard d’une province, le ministre n’a pas à verser une portion des recettes à cette province.



Montant égal ou inférieur à zéro










Reconciliation



(1.7) Except for the final reconciliation, a reconciliation of the amounts used in calculations is to be made annually.









(1.7) Sauf en ce qui a trait au rapprochement final, un rapprochement des sommes est effectué annuellement.



Rapprochement












(2) Section 99 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(2) L’article 99 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Regulations



(3) The Governor in Council may, on the recommendation of the Minister for International Trade, make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this section.









(3) Le gouverneur en conseil peut par règlement, sur recommandation du ministre du Commerce international, prendre toute mesure d’application du présent article.



Règlements












312. Subsection 100(2) of the Act is repealed.









312. Le paragraphe 100(2) de la même loi est abrogé.














Division 23









Section 23










2009, c. 2



Budget Implementation Act, 2009









Loi d’exécution du budget de 2009



2009, ch. 2












313. Subsection 295(1) of the Budget Implementation Act, 2009 is replaced by the following:









313. Le paragraphe 295(1) de la Loi d’exécution du budget de 2009 est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Maximum payment



295. (1) The Minister of Finance may make direct payments, in an aggregate amount not exceeding $150,000,000 or any other amount that may be specified in an appropriation Act, to provinces and territories for matters relating to the establishment of a Canadian securities regulation regime and a Canadian regulatory authority.









295. (1) Le ministre des Finances peut faire des paiements directs, jusqu’à concurrence de cent cinquante millions de dollars ou de la somme qui peut être précisée par loi de crédits, à des provinces et à des territoires au titre de mesures liées à l’établissement d’un régime canadien de réglementation des valeurs mobilières et à la constitution d’une autorité administrative canadienne.



Paiement maximal












Division 24









Section 24












Securitization of Insured Mortgage or Hypothecary Loans









Titrisation de prêts hypothécaires assurés










2011, c. 15, s. 20



Protection of Residential Mortgage or Hypothecary Insurance Act









Loi sur la protection de l’assurance hypothécaire résidentielle



2001, ch. 15, art. 20












314. Section 19 of the Protection of Residential Mortgage or Hypothecary Insurance Act is replaced by the following:









314. L’article 19 de la Loi sur la protection de l’assurance hypothécaire résidentielle est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Pre-existing contracts



19. If a winding-up order is made in respect of a company, a contract of insurance that the company entered into before the coming into force of this Act is deemed, in respect of a mortgage or hypothecary loan that is the subject of the contract of insurance, to be a policy issued to a qualified mortgage lender in respect of an eligible mortgage loan for the purposes of sections 16, 17 and 20 to 25, if








(a) Her Majesty would have been bound to make a payment in respect of the contract of insurance had section 44 not come into force; and








(b) the mortgage or hypothecary loan meets the criteria established by regulations made under subsection 42(1) that relate to a guarantee of payment referred to in subsection 14(1) of the National Housing Act.









19. Si une ordonnance de mise en liquidation est rendue à l’égard d’une société, tout contrat d’assurance qu’elle a conclu avant l’entrée en vigueur de la présente loi est réputé, à l’égard d’un prêt hypothécaire faisant l’objet du contrat d’assurance, constituer une police émise à un prêteur hypothécaire qualifié à l’égard d’un prêt hypothécaire admissible pour l’application des articles 16, 17 et 20 à 25, dans le cas où :



Contrats pré-existants




a) d’une part, Sa Majesté aurait été tenue, n’eût été l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 44, de faire un paiement à l’égard du contrat d’assurance;








b) d’autre part, le prêt hypothécaire respecte tout critère fixé par règlement en vertu du paragraphe 42(1) et relatif aux garanties de paiement visées au paragraphe 14(1) de la Loi nationale sur l’habitation.
















315. Section 42 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









315. L’article 42 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Criterion — guarantee



(1.1) Any criterion established by a regulation made under subsection (1) that relates to a guarantee of payment referred to in subsection 14(1) of the National Housing Act may apply to an existing insured mortgage or hypothecary loan.









(1.1) Tout critère fixé par règlement en vertu du paragraphe (1) et relatif aux garanties de paiement visées au paragraphe 14(1) de la Loi nationale sur l’habitation peut s’appliquer à un prêt hypothécaire assuré existant.



Critère concernant les garanties de paiement








R.S., c. N-11



National Housing Act









Loi nationale sur l’habitation



L.R., ch. N-11












316. Section 8.1 of the National Housing Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









316. L’article 8.1 de la Loi nationale sur l’habitation est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Criterion — guarantee



(1.1) Any criterion established by a regulation made under subsection (1) that relates to a guarantee of payment referred to in subsection 14(1) may apply to an existing insured loan.









(1.1) Tout critère fixé par règlement en vertu du paragraphe (1) et relatif aux garanties de paiements visées au paragraphe 14(1) peut s’appliquer à un prêt assuré existant.



Critère concernant les garanties de paiement












Division 25









Section 25










R.S., c. T-13



Amendments Relating to International Treaties on Trademarks









Modifications liées aux traités internationaux sur les marques de commerce



L.R., ch. T-13










Amendments to the Trade-marks Act









Modification de la Loi sur les marques de commerce














317. The long title of the English version of the Trade-marks Act is replaced by the following:









317. Le titre intégral de la version anglaise de la Loi sur les marques de commerce est remplacé par ce qui suit :














An Act relating to trademarks and unfair competition









An Act relating to trademarks and unfair competition














318. Section 1 of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:









318. L’article 1 de la version anglaise de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the  Trademarks Act.









1. This Act may be cited as the Trademarks Act.



Short title












319. (1) The definition “distinguishing guise” in section 2 of the Act is repealed.









319. (1) La définition de « signe distinctif », à l’article 2 de la même loi, est abrogée.














(2) The definitions “proposed trade-mark” and “representative for service” in section 2 of the Act are repealed.









(2) Les définitions de « marque de commerce projetée » et « représentant pour signification », à l’article 2 de la même loi, sont abrogées.














(3) The definition “wares” in section 2 of the Act is repealed.









(3) La définition de « marchandises », à l’article 2 de la même loi, est abrogée.














(4) The definitions “certification mark” and “trade-mark” in section 2 of the Act are replaced by the following:









(4) Les définitions de « marque de certification » et « marque de commerce », à l’article 2 de la même loi, sont respectivement remplacées par ce qui suit :












“certification mark”« marque de certification »



“certification mark” means a sign or combination of signs that is used or proposed to be used for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish goods or services that are of a defined standard from those that are not of that defined standard, with respect to








(a) the character or quality of the goods or services,








(b) the working conditions under which the goods are produced or the services performed,








(c) the class of persons by whom the goods are produced or the services performed, or








(d) the area within which the goods are produced or the services performed;




“trademark”« marque de commerce »



“trademark” means








(a) a sign or combination of signs that is used or proposed to be used by a person for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish their goods or services from those of others, or








(b) a certification mark;









« marque de certification » Signe ou combinaison de signes qui est employé ou que l’on projette d’employer pour distinguer, ou de façon à distinguer, les produits ou services qui sont d’une norme définie par rapport à ceux qui ne le sont pas, en ce qui concerne :



« marque de certification »“certification mark”




a) soit la nature ou la qualité des produits ou services;








b) soit les conditions de travail dans lesquelles ont lieu leur production ou leur exécution;








c) soit la catégorie de personnes qui les produit ou exécute;








d) soit la région dans laquelle ont lieu leur production ou leur exécution.








« marque de commerce » Selon le cas :



« marque de commerce »“trademark”




a) signe ou combinaison de signes qui est employé par une personne ou que celle-ci projette d’employer pour distinguer, ou de façon à distinguer, ses produits ou services de ceux d’autres personnes;








b) marque de certification.
















(5) Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(5) L’article 2 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :












“Nice Classification”« classification de Nice »



“Nice Classification” means the classification established by the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, signed at Nice on June 15, 1957, including any amendments, modifications and revisions made from time to time to which Canada is a party;




“sign”« signe »



“sign” includes a word, a personal name, a design, a letter, a numeral, a colour, a figurative element, a three-dimensional shape, a hologram, a moving image, a mode of packaging goods, a sound, a scent, a taste, a texture and the positioning of a sign;









« classification de Nice » La classification instituée par l’Arrangement de Nice concernant la classification internationale des produits et des services aux fins de l’enregistrement des marques, signé à Nice le 15 juin 1957, ainsi que les modifications et révisions subséquentes apportées à celui-ci et auxquelles le Canada est partie.



« classification de Nice »“Nice Classification”




« signe » Vise notamment les mots, les noms de personne, les dessins, les lettres, les chiffres, les couleurs, les éléments figuratifs, les formes tridimensionnelles, les hologrammes, les images en mouvement, les façons d’emballer les produits, les sons, les odeurs, les goûts et les textures ainsi que la position de tout signe.



« signe »“sign”












320. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 2:









320. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 2, de ce qui suit :












Reference to “person”



2.1 Unless the context requires otherwise, a reference to “person” in this Act, in relation to a trademark, includes two or more persons who, by agreement, do not have the right to use the trademark in Canada except on behalf of both or all of them.









2.1 Sauf indication contraire du contexte, la mention de « personne » dans la présente loi vise, relativement à une marque de commerce, deux ou plusieurs personnes ayant conclu un accord leur interdisant, si ce n’est en leurs deux noms ou au nom de l’ensemble de ces personnes, selon le cas, d’employer la marque de commerce au Canada.



Mention de « personne »












321. (1) Subsections 6(2) to (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:









321. (1) Les paragraphes 6(2) à (4) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Confusion — trademark with other trademark



(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the goods or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the goods or services are of the same general class or appear in the same class of the Nice Classification.









(2) L’emploi d’une marque de commerce crée de la confusion avec une autre marque de commerce lorsque l’emploi des deux marques de commerce dans la même région serait susceptible de faire conclure que les produits liés à ces marques de commerce sont fabriqués, vendus, donnés à bail ou loués, ou que les services liés à ces marques sont loués ou exécutés, par la même personne, que ces produits ou services soient ou non de la même catégorie générale ou figurent ou non dans la même classe de la classification de Nice.



Marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec une autre










Confusion — trademark with trade name



(3) The use of a trademark causes confusion with a trade name if the use of both the trademark and trade name in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the goods or services associated with the trademark and those associated with the business carried on under the trade name are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the goods or services are of the same general class or appear in the same class of the Nice Classification.









(3) L’emploi d’une marque de commerce crée de la confusion avec un nom commercial lorsque l’emploi des deux dans la même région serait susceptible de faire conclure que les produits liés à cette marque et les produits liés à l’entreprise poursuivie sous ce nom sont fabriqués, vendus, donnés à bail ou loués, ou que les services liés à cette marque et les services liés à l’entreprise poursuivie sous ce nom sont loués ou exécutés, par la même personne, que ces produits ou services soient ou non de la même catégorie générale ou figurent ou non dans la même classe de la classification de Nice.



Marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec un nom commercial










Confusion — trade name with trademark



(4) The use of a trade name causes confusion with a trademark if the use of both the trade name and trademark in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the goods or services associated with the business carried on under the trade name and those associated with the trademark are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the goods or services are of the same general class or appear in the same class of the Nice Classification.









(4) L’emploi d’un nom commercial crée de la confusion avec une marque de commerce lorsque l’emploi des deux dans la même région serait susceptible de faire conclure que les produits liés à l’entreprise poursuivie sous ce nom et les produits liés à cette marque sont fabriqués, vendus, donnés à bail ou loués, ou que les services liés à l’entreprise poursuivie sous ce nom et les services liés à cette marque sont loués ou exécutés, par la même personne, que ces produits ou services soient ou non de la même catégorie générale ou figurent ou non dans la même classe de la classification de Nice.



Nom commercial créant de la confusion avec une marque de commerce












(2) Paragraph 6(5)(e) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 6(5)e) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names, including in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them.









e) le degré de ressemblance entre les marques de commerce ou les noms commerciaux, notamment dans la présentation ou le son, ou dans les idées qu’ils suggèrent.














322. The heading before section 7 of the Act is replaced by the following:









322. L’intertitre précédant l’article 7 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












UNFAIR COMPETITION AND PROHIBITED SIGNS









CONCURRENCE DÉLOYALE ET SIGNES INTERDITS














323. (1) Paragraph 9(1)(d) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









323. (1) L’alinéa 9(1)d) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














d) un mot ou symbole susceptible de porter à croire que les produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels il est employé ont reçu l’approbation royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale, ou que leur production, leur vente ou leur exécution a lieu sous le patronage ou sur l’autorité royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale;









d) un mot ou symbole susceptible de porter à croire que les produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels il est employé ont reçu l’approbation royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale, ou que leur production, leur vente ou leur exécution a lieu sous le patronage ou sur l’autorité royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale;












1994, c. 47, s. 191(2)



(2) Paragraph 9(1)(i.3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 9(1)i.3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, par. 191(2)












(i.3) any armorial bearing, flag or other emblem, or the name or any abbreviation of the name, of an international intergovernmental organization, if the armorial bearing, flag, emblem, name or abbreviation is on a list communicated under article 6ter of the Convention or pursuant to the obligations under the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights set out in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement stemming from that article, and the Registrar gives public notice of the communication;









i.3) les armoiries, les drapeaux ou autres emblèmes d’une organisation intergouvernementale internationale ainsi que sa dénomination et son sigle, qui figurent sur une liste communiquée conformément à l’article 6ter de la Convention ou en vertu des obligations prévues à l’Accord sur les aspects des droits de propriété intellectuelle qui touchent au commerce figurant à l’annexe 1C de l’Accord sur l’OMC et découlant de cet article, pourvu que la communication ait fait l’objet d’un avis public du registraire;












1993, c. 15, s. 58(4)



(3) Paragraph 9(2)(b)(ii) is replaced by the following:









(3) Le sous-alinéa 9(2)b)(ii) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, par. 58(4)












(ii) an armorial bearing, flag, emblem, name or abbreviation mentioned in paragraph (1)(i.3), unless the use of the mark is likely to mislead the public as to a connection between the user and the organization.









(ii) les armoiries, drapeaux, emblèmes, dénominations et sigles visés à l’alinéa (1)i.3), sauf si l’emploi de la marque est susceptible d’induire en erreur le public quant au lien qu’il y aurait entre l’utilisateur de la marque et l’organisation visée à cet alinéa.














324. Section 10 of the Act is replaced by the following:









324. L’article 10 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Further prohibitions



10. If any sign or combination of signs has by ordinary and bona fide commercial usage become recognized in Canada as designating the kind, quality, quantity, destination, value, place of origin or date of production of any goods or services, no person shall adopt it as a trademark in association with the goods or services or others of the same general class or use it in a way likely to mislead, nor shall any person so adopt or so use any sign or combination of signs so nearly resembling that sign or combination as to be likely to be mistaken for it.









10. Si un signe ou une combinaison de signes, en raison d’une pratique commerciale ordinaire et authentique, devient reconnu au Canada comme désignant le genre, la qualité, la quantité, la destination, la valeur, la date de production ou le lieu d’origine de produits ou services, nul ne peut l’adopter comme marque de commerce en liaison avec ces produits ou services ou d’autres de la même catégorie générale, ou l’employer d’une manière susceptible d’induire en erreur, et nul ne peut ainsi adopter ou employer un signe ou une combinaison de signes dont la ressemblance avec le signe ou la combinaison de signes en question est telle qu’on pourrait vraisemblablement les confondre.



Autres interdictions












325. Section 11 of the Act is replaced by the following:









325. L’article 11 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Further prohibitions



11. No person shall use in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any sign or combination of signs adopted contrary to section 9 or 10.









11. Nul ne peut employer relativement à une entreprise, comme marque de commerce ou autrement, un signe ou une combinaison de signes adopté contrairement aux articles 9 ou 10.



Autres interdictions












326. (1) The portion of subsection 12(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









326. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 12(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












When trademark registrable



12. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a trademark is registrable if it is not









12. (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), la marque de commerce est enregistrable sauf dans l’un ou l’autre des cas suivants :



Marque de commerce enregistrable










1993, c. 15, s. 59(F)



(2) Paragraph 12(1)(b) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 12(1)b) de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 59(F)












b) qu’elle soit sous forme graphique, écrite ou sonore, elle donne une description claire ou donne une description fausse et trompeuse, en langue française ou anglaise, de la nature ou de la qualité des produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée, ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer, ou des conditions de leur production, ou des personnes qui les produisent, ou de leur lieu d’origine;









b) qu’elle soit sous forme graphique, écrite ou sonore, elle donne une description claire ou donne une description fausse et trompeuse, en langue française ou anglaise, de la nature ou de la qualité des produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée, ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer, ou des conditions de leur production, ou des personnes qui les produisent, ou de leur lieu d’origine;














(3) Paragraph 12(1)(e) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) L’alinéa 12(1)e) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(e) a sign or combination of signs whose adoption is prohibited by section 9 or 10;









e) elle est un signe ou une combinaison de signes dont les articles 9 ou 10 interdisent l’adoption;














(4) Subsection 12(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 12(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Utilitarian function



(2) A trademark is not registrable if, in relation to the goods or services in association with which it is used or proposed to be used, its features are dictated primarily by a utilitarian function.









(2) La marque de commerce n’est pas enregistrable si, à l’égard des produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée, ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer, ses caractéristiques résultent principalement d’une fonction utilitaire.



Fonction utilitaire










Registrable if distinctive



(3) A trademark that is not registrable by reason of paragraph (1)(a) or (b) is registrable if it is distinctive at the filing date of an application for its registration, having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the length of time during which it has been used.









(3) La marque de commerce qui n’est pas enregistrable en raison des alinéas (1)a) ou b) peut être enregistrée si elle est distinctive à la date de production d’une demande d’enregistrement la concernant, eu égard aux circonstances, notamment la durée de l’emploi qui en a été fait.



Marque de commerce distinctive












327. Section 13 of the Act is repealed.









327. L’article 13 de la même loi est abrogé.












1994, c. 47, s. 194



328. Sections 14 and 15 of the Act are replaced by the following:









328. Les articles 14 et 15 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 194










Registration of confusing trademarks



15. Despite section 12, confusing trademarks are registrable if the applicant is the owner of all of the confusing trademarks.









15. Malgré l’article 12, les marques de commerce créant de la confusion sont enregistrables si le requérant est le propriétaire de toutes ces marques.



Enregistrement de marques de commerce créant de la confusion












329. The heading before section 16 of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









329. L’intertitre précédant l’article 16 de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












PERSONNES AYANT DROIT À L’ENREGISTREMENT D’UNE MARQUE DE COMMERCE









PERSONNES AYANT DROIT À L’ENREGISTREMENT D’UNE MARQUE DE COMMERCE














330. (1) The portion of subsection 16(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









330. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 16(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Entitlement to registration



16. (1) Any applicant who has filed an application in accordance with subsec-tion 30(2) for the registration of a registrable trademark is entitled, subject to section 38, to secure its registration in respect of the goods or services specified in the application, unless at the filing date of the application or the date of first use of the trademark in Canada, whichever is earlier, it was confusing with









16. (1) Tout requérant qui a produit une demande conforme au paragraphe 30(2) en vue de l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce enregistrable a droit, sous réserve de l’article 38, d’obtenir cet enregistrement à l’égard des produits ou services spécifiés dans la demande, à moins que, à la date de production de la demande ou à la date à laquelle la marque a été employée pour la première fois au Canada, la première éventualité étant à retenir, la marque n’ait créé de la confusion :



Droit à l’enregistrement










1994, c. 47, s. 195



(2) Subsections 16(2) to (5) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(2) Les paragraphes 16(2) à (5) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 195










Pending application



(2) The right of an applicant to secure registration of a registrable trademark is not affected by the previous filing of an application for registration of a confusing trademark by another person, unless the application for registration of the confusing trademark was pending on the day on which the applicant’s application is advertised under subsection 37(1).









(2) Le droit, pour un requérant, d’obtenir l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce enregistrable n’est pas atteint par la production antérieure, par une autre personne, d’une demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce créant de la confusion, à moins que la demande d’enregistrement de la marque de commerce créant de la confusion n’ait été pen- dante à la date de l’annonce de la demande du requérant en application du paragraphe 37(1).



Demande pendante










Previous use or making known



(3) The right of an applicant to secure registration of a registrable trademark is not affected by the previous use or making known of a confusing trademark or trade name by another person, if the confusing trademark or trade name was abandoned on the day on which the applicant’s application is advertised under subsection 37(1).









(3) Le droit, pour un requérant, d’obtenir l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce enregistrable n’est pas atteint par l’emploi antérieur, ou la révélation antérieure, par une autre personne, d’une marque de commerce ou d’un nom commercial créant de la confusion, si la marque de commerce ou le nom commercial créant de la confusion a été abandonné à la date de l’annonce de la demande du requérant en application du paragraphe 37(1).



Emploi antérieur ou révélation antérieure












331. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 18:









331. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 18, de ce qui suit :












Not to limit art or industry



18.1 The registration of a trademark may be expunged by the Federal Court on the application of any person interested if the Court decides that the registration is likely to unreasonably limit the development of any art or industry.









18.1 L’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce peut être radié par la Cour fédérale, sur demande de toute personne intéressée, si le tribunal décide que l’enregistrement est vraisemblablement de nature à restreindre d’une façon déraisonnable le développement d’un art ou d’une industrie.



Aucune restriction à l’art ou à l’industrie












332. Section 20 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):









332. L’article 20 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (1), de ce qui suit :












Exception — utilitarian feature



(1.1) The registration of a trademark does not prevent a person from using any utilitarian feature embodied in the trademark.









(1.1) L’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce n’a pas pour effet d’empêcher une personne d’utiliser toute caractéristique utilitaire incorporée dans la marque.



Exception — caractéristique utilitaire












333. Subsection 21(1) of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:









333. Le paragraphe 21(1) de la version anglaise de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Concurrent use of confusing marks



21. (1) If, in any proceedings respecting a registered trademark the registration of which is entitled to the protection of subsection 17(2), it is made to appear to the Federal Court that one of the parties to the proceedings, other than the registered owner of the trademark, had in good faith used a confusing trademark or trade name in Canada before the filing date of the application for that registration, and the Court considers that it is not contrary to the public interest that the continued use of the confusing trademark or trade name should be permitted in a defined territorial area concurrently with the use of the registered trademark, the Court may, subject to any terms that it considers just, order that the other party may continue to use the confusing trademark or trade name within that area with an adequate specified distinction from the registered trademark.









21. (1) If, in any proceedings respecting a registered trademark the registration of which is entitled to the protection of subsection 17(2), it is made to appear to the Federal Court that one of the parties to the proceedings, other than the registered owner of the trademark, had in good faith used a confusing trademark or trade name in Canada before the filing date of the application for that registration, and the Court considers that it is not contrary to the public interest that the continued use of the confusing trademark or trade name should be permitted in a defined territorial area concurrently with the use of the registered trademark, the Court may, subject to any terms that it considers just, order that the other party may continue to use the confusing trademark or trade name within that area with an adequate specified distinction from the registered trademark.



Concurrent use of confusing marks












334. (1) Subsections 23(1) to (3) of the Act are replaced by the following:









334. (1) Les paragraphes 23(1) à (3) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Registration of certification marks



23. (1) A certification mark may be adopted and registered only by a person who is not engaged in the manufacture, sale, leasing or hiring of goods or the performance of services such as those in association with which the certification mark is used or proposed to be used.









23. (1) Une marque de certification ne peut être adoptée et déposée que par une personne qui ne se livre pas à la fabrication, à la vente, à la location à bail ou au louage de produits ni à l’exécution de services, tels que ceux en liaison avec lesquels la marque de certification est employée ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer.



Enregistrement de marques de certification










Licence



(2) The owner of a certification mark may license others to use it in association with goods or services that meet the defined standard, and the use of the certification mark accordingly is deemed to be use by the owner.









(2) Le propriétaire d’une marque de certification peut autoriser d’autres personnes à l’employer en liaison avec des produits ou services qui se conforment à la norme définie, et l’emploi de la marque en conséquence est réputé un emploi par le propriétaire.



Autorisation










Unauthorized use



(3) The owner of a registered certification mark may prevent its use by unlicensed persons or in association with any goods or services in respect of which it is registered but to which the licence does not extend.









(3) Le propriétaire d’une marque de certification déposée peut empêcher qu’elle soit employée par des personnes non autorisées ou en liaison avec des produits ou services à l’égard desquels elle est déposée, mais auxquels l’autorisation ne s’étend pas.



Emploi non autorisé












(2) Subsection 23(4) of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 23(4) de la version anglaise de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Action by unincorporated body



(4) If the owner of a registered certification mark is an unincorporated body, any action or proceeding to prevent unauthorized use of the certification mark may be brought by any member of that body on behalf of themselves and all other members.









(4) If the owner of a registered certification mark is an unincorporated body, any action or proceeding to prevent unauthorized use of the certification mark may be brought by any member of that body on behalf of themselves and all other members.



Action by unincorporated body












335. Section 24 of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









335. L’article 24 de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Enregistrement d’une marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec la marque de certification



24. Avec le consentement du propriétaire d’une marque de certification, une marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec la marque de certification peut, si elle présente une différence caractéristique, être déposée par toute autre personne en vue d’indiquer que les produits en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée ont été fabriqués, vendus, donnés à bail ou loués, et que les services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée ont été exécutés par elle comme étant une des personnes ayant droit d’employer la marque de certification, mais l’enregistrement de cette marque de commerce est radié par le registraire sur le retrait du consentement du propriétaire de la marque de certification, ou sur annulation de l’enregistrement de la marque de certification.









24. Avec le consentement du propriétaire d’une marque de certification, une marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec la marque de certification peut, si elle présente une différence caractéristique, être déposée par toute autre personne en vue d’indiquer que les produits en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée ont été fabriqués, vendus, donnés à bail ou loués, et que les services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée ont été exécutés par elle comme étant une des personnes ayant droit d’employer la marque de certification, mais l’enregistrement de cette marque de commerce est radié par le registraire sur le retrait du consentement du propriétaire de la marque de certification, ou sur annulation de l’enregistrement de la marque de certification.



Enregistrement d’une marque de commerce créant de la confusion avec la marque de certification












336. Section 25 of the Act is replaced by the following:









336. L’article 25 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Descriptive certification mark



25. A certification mark that is descriptive of the place of origin of goods or services, and not confusing with any registered trademark, is registrable if the applicant is the administrative authority of a country, state, province or municipality that includes or forms part of the area indicated by the certification mark, or is a commercial association that has an office or representative in that area, but the owner of any certification mark registered under this section shall permit its use in association with any goods or services produced or performed in the area of which it is descriptive.









25. Une marque de certification descriptive du lieu d’origine des produits ou services et ne créant aucune confusion avec une marque de commerce déposée est enregistrable si le requérant est l’autorité administrative d’un pays, d’un État, d’une province ou d’une municipalité comprenant la région indiquée par la marque de certification ou en faisant partie, ou est une association commerciale ayant un bureau ou un représentant dans une telle région. Toutefois, le propriétaire d’une marque de certification déposée aux termes du présent article doit en permettre l’emploi en liaison avec tout produit ou service dont la région de production ou d’exécution est celle que désigne la marque de certification.



Marque de certification descriptive












337. Subsection 26(2) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (e) and by adding the following after that paragraph:









337. Le paragraphe 26(2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :














(e.1) the names of the goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered, grouped according to the classes of the Nice Classification, each group being preceded by the number of the class of the Nice Classification to which that group of goods or services belongs and presented in the order of the classes of the Nice Classification; and









e.1) le nom des produits ou services à l’égard desquels cette marque est enregistrée, groupés selon les classes de la classification de Nice, chaque groupe étant précédé du numéro de la classe de cette classification à laquelle il appartient et étant présenté dans l’ordre des classes de cette classification;












1993, c. 15, s. 62



338. Section 28 of the Act is replaced by the following:









338. L’article 28 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 62










List of trademark agents



28. There shall be kept under the supervision of the Registrar a list of trademark agents, which shall include the names of all persons and firms entitled to represent applicants and others, including the registered owner of a trademark and parties to the proceedings under sections 38 and 45, in all business before the Office of the Registrar of Trademarks.









28. Est tenue, sous la surveillance du registraire, une liste des agents de marques de commerce comportant les noms des personnes et études habilitées à représenter les requérants, les propriétaires inscrits d’une marque de commerce, les parties aux procédures visées aux articles 38 et 45 et toute autre personne dans toute affaire devant le bureau du registraire des marques de commerce.



Liste des agents de marques de commerce










1993, c. 15, s. 64; 1994, c. 47, s. 198



339. Sections 30 to 33 of the Act are replaced by the following:









339. Les articles 30 à 33 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 64; 1994, ch. 47, art. 198










Requirements for application



30. (1) A person may file with the Registrar an application for the registration of a trademark in respect of goods or services if they are using or propose to use, and are entitled to use, the trademark in Canada in association with those goods or services.









30. (1) Une personne peut produire auprès du registraire une demande en vue de l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce à l’égard de produits ou services si elle emploie ou projette d’employer — et a droit d’employer — la marque de commerce au Canada en liaison avec ces produits ou services.



Demande










Contents of application



(2) The application shall contain








(a) a statement in ordinary commercial terms of the goods or services in association with which the trademark is used or proposed to be used;








(b) in the case of a certification mark, particulars of the defined standard that the use of the certification mark is intended to indicate and a statement that the applicant is not engaged in the manufacture, sale, leasing or hiring of goods or the performance of services such as those in association with which the certification mark is used or proposed to be used;








(c) a representation or description, or both, that permits the trademark to be clearly defined and that complies with any prescribed requirements; and








(d) any prescribed information or statement.









(2) La demande contient :



Contenu de la demande




a) un état, dressé dans les termes ordinaires du commerce, des produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels la marque de commerce est employée ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer;








b) dans le cas d’une marque de certification, les détails de la norme définie que son emploi est destiné à indiquer et une déclaration portant que le requérant ne se livre pas à la fabrication, à la vente, à la location à bail ou au louage de produits ni à l’exécution de services, tels que ceux en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée ou en liaison avec lesquels on projette de l’employer;








c) une représentation, une description ou une combinaison des deux qui permettent de définir clairement la marque de commerce et qui sont conformes à toute exigence prescrite;








d) toute déclaration ou tout renseignement prescrits.














Nice Classification



(3) The goods or services referred to in paragraph (2)(a) are to be grouped according to the classes of the Nice Classification, each group being preceded by the number of the class of the Nice Classification to which that group of goods or services belongs and presented in the order of the classes of the Nice Classification.









(3) Les produits ou services visés à l’alinéa (2)a) sont groupés selon les classes de la classification de Nice, chaque groupe étant précédé du numéro de la classe de cette classification à laquelle il appartient et étant présenté dans l’ordre des classes de cette classification.



Classification de Nice










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










Standard characters



31. An applicant who seeks to register a trademark that consists only of letters, numerals, punctuation marks, diacritics or typographical symbols, or of any combination of them, without limiting the trademark to any particular font, size or colour shall








(a) file a representation under paragraph 30(2)(c) that consists only of characters for which the Registrar has adopted standard characters;








(b) include in their application a statement to the effect that they wish the trademark to be registered in standard characters; and








(c) comply with any prescribed requirements.









31. Le requérant, s’il veut enregistrer une marque de commerce qui consiste uniquement en des lettres, des chiffres, des signes de ponctuation, diacritiques ou typographiques ou en une combinaison de ces choses et qui n’est pas limitée à une police, une taille ou une couleur précises, est tenu :



Caractères standard




a) de fournir, en application de l’alinéa 30(2)c), une représentation qui consiste uniquement en des caractères pour lesquels le registraire a adopté des caractères standard;








b) de fournir, dans sa demande, une déclaration portant qu’il souhaite que la marque de commerce soit enregistrée en caractères standard;








c) de se conformer à toute exigence prescrite.














Further evidence in certain cases



32. (1) An applicant shall furnish the Registrar with any evidence that the Registrar may require establishing that the trademark is distinctive at the filing date of the application for its registration if any of the following apply:








(a) the applicant claims that their trademark is registrable under subsection 12(3);








(b) the Registrar’s preliminary view is that the trademark is not inherently distinctive;








(c) the trademark consists exclusively of a single colour or of a combination of colours without delineated contours;








(d) the trademark consists exclusively or primarily of one or more of the following signs:








(i) the three-dimensional shape of any of the goods specified in the application, or of an integral part or the packaging of any of those goods,








(ii) a mode of packaging goods,








(iii) a sound,








(iv) a scent,








(v) a taste,








(vi) a texture,








(vii) any other prescribed sign.









32. (1) Le requérant fournit au registraire toute preuve que celui-ci peut exiger établissant que la marque de commerce est distinctive à la date de production de la demande d’enregistrement, si selon le cas :



Autres preuves dans certains cas




a) le requérant prétend qu’elle est enregistrable en vertu du paragraphe 12(3);








b) elle n’a pas, selon l’avis préliminaire du registraire, de caractère distinctif inhérent;








c) elle consiste exclusivement en une seule couleur ou en une combinaison de couleurs sans contour délimité;








d) elle consiste exclusivement ou principalement en l’un ou plusieurs des signes suivants :








(i) la forme tridimensionnelle de tout produit spécifié dans la demande ou d’une partie essentielle ou de l’emballage d’un tel produit,








(ii) la façon d’emballer un produit,








(iii) un son,








(iv) une odeur,








(v) un goût,








(vi) une texture,








(vii) tout autre signe prescrit.














Registration to be restricted



(2) The Registrar shall, having regard to the evidence adduced, restrict the registration to the goods or services in association with which, and to the defined territorial area in Canada in which, the trademark is shown to be distinctive.









(2) Le registraire restreint, eu égard à la preuve fournie, l’enregistrement aux produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels il est démontré que la marque de commerce est distinctive, et à la région territoriale définie au Canada où, d’après ce qui est démontré, la marque de commerce est distinctive.



L’enregistrement est restreint










Filing date



33. (1) The filing date of an application for the registration of a trademark in Canada is the day on which the Registrar has received all of the following:








(a) an explicit or implicit indication that the registration of the trademark is sought;








(b) information allowing the identity of the applicant to be established;








(c) information allowing the Registrar to contact the applicant;








(d) a representation or description of the trademark;








(e) a list of the goods or services for which registration of the trademark is sought;








(f) any prescribed fees.









33. (1) La date de production de la demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce au Canada est la date à laquelle le registraire a reçu :



Date de production de la demande




a) l’indication, explicite ou implicite, que l’enregistrement de la marque de commerce est demandé;








b) des renseignements permettant d’établir l’identité du requérant;








c) des renseignements lui permettant de contacter le requérant;








d) une représentation ou une description de la marque de commerce;








e) la liste des produits ou services à l’égard desquels l’enregistrement est demandé;








f) les droits prescrits.














Outstanding items



(2) The Registrar shall notify the applicant whose application does not contain all the items set out in subsection (1) of the items that are outstanding and require that the applicant submit them within two months of the date of the notice. Despite section 47, that period cannot be extended.









(2) Le registraire notifie au requérant dont la demande ne contient pas tous les éléments visés au paragraphe (1) les éléments manquants et exige que le requérant les soumette dans les deux mois suivant la date de la notification. Malgré l’article 47, ce délai ne peut être prolongé.



Éléments manquants










Application deemed never filed



(3) If the Registrar does not receive the outstanding items within those two months, the application is deemed never to have been filed. However, any fees paid in respect of the application shall not be refunded to the applicant.









(3) Si le registraire ne reçoit pas les éléments manquants dans ce délai, la demande est réputée ne pas avoir été produite. Les droits payés dans le cadre de la demande ne sont toutefois pas remboursables.



Demande réputée non produite










1994, c. 47, s. 199



340. (1) Subsection 34(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









340. (1) Le paragraphe 34(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 199










Date of application abroad deemed date of application in Canada



34. (1) Despite subsection 33(1), when an applicant files an application for the registration of a trademark in Canada after the applicant or the applicant’s predecessor in title has applied, in or for any country of the Union other than Canada, for the registration of the same or substantially the same trademark in association with the same kind of goods or services, the filing date of the application in or for the other country is deemed to be the filing date of the application in Canada and the applicant is entitled to priority in Canada accordingly despite any intervening use in Canada or making known in Canada or any intervening application or registration, if








(a) the filing date of the application in Canada is within a period of six months after the date on which the earliest application was filed in or for any country of the Union for the registration of the same or substantially the same trademark in association with the same kind of goods or services;








(b) the applicant files a request for priority in the prescribed time and manner and informs the Registrar of the filing date and country or office of filing of the application on which the request is based;








(c) the applicant, at the filing date of the application in Canada, is a citizen or national of or domiciled in a country of the Union or has a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment in a country of the Union; and








(d) the applicant furnishes, in accordance with any request under subsections (2) and (3), evidence necessary to fully establish the applicant’s right to priority.









34. (1) Malgré le paragraphe 33(1), lorsqu’un requérant produit une demande pour l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce au Canada après que lui ou son prédécesseur en titre a produit une demande d’enregistrement, dans un autre pays de l’Union, ou pour un autre pays de l’Union, de la même marque de commerce, ou sensiblement la même, en liaison avec le même genre de produits ou services, la date de production de la demande dans l’autre pays, ou pour l’autre pays, est réputée être la date de production de la demande au Canada, et le requérant a droit, au Canada, à une priorité correspondante malgré tout emploi ou toute révélation faite au Canada, ou toute demande ou tout enregistrement survenu, dans l’intervalle, si les conditions suivantes sont réunies :



La date de demande à l’étranger est réputée être la date de demande au Canada




a) la date de production de la demande d’enregistrement au Canada ne dépasse pas de plus de six mois la production, dans un pays de l’Union, ou pour un pays de l’Union, de la plus ancienne demande d’enregistrement de la même marque de commerce, ou sensiblement la même, en liaison avec le même genre de produits ou services;








b) le requérant produit une demande de priorité selon les modalités prescrites et informe le registraire du nom du pays ou du bureau où a été produite la demande d’enregistrement sur laquelle la demande de priorité est fondée, ainsi que de la date de production de cette demande d’enregistrement;








c) à la date de production de la demande d’enregistrement au Canada, le requérant est un citoyen ou ressortissant d’un pays de l’Union, ou y est domicilié, ou y a un établissement industriel ou commercial effectif et sérieux;








d) le requérant, sur demande faite en application des paragraphes (2) ou (3), fournit toute preuve nécessaire pour établir pleinement son droit à la priorité.
















(2) Subsection 34(2) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 34(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Evidence requests



(2) The Registrar may request the evidence before the day on which the trademark is registered under section 40.









(2) Le registraire peut requérir cette preuve avant l’enregistrement de la marque de commerce aux termes de l’article 40.



Preuve












(3) Section 34 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):









(3) L’article 34 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (3), de ce qui suit :












Withdrawal of request



(4) An applicant may, in the prescribed time and manner, withdraw a request for priority.









(4) Le requérant peut, selon les modalités prescrites, retirer sa demande de priorité.



Retrait










Extension



(5) An applicant is not permitted to apply under section 47 for an extension of the six-month period referred to in paragraph (1)(a) until that period has ended, and the Registrar is not permitted to extend the period by more than seven days.









(5) Le requérant ne peut demander la prolongation, au titre de l’article 47, de la période de six mois prévue à l’alinéa (1)a) qu’après l’expiration de celle-ci. Le registraire ne peut la prolonger que d’au plus sept jours.



Prolongation












341. Section 36 of the Act is replaced by the following:









341. L’article 36 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Abandonment



36. If, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the prosecution of an application filed under this Act, the Registrar may, after giving notice to the applicant of the default, treat the application as abandoned unless the default is remedied within the prescribed time.









36. Lorsque, de l’avis du registraire, un requérant fait défaut dans la poursuite d’une demande produite aux termes de la présente loi, le registraire peut, après avoir donné au requérant avis de ce défaut, traiter la demande comme ayant été abandonnée, à moins qu’il ne soit remédié au défaut dans le délai prescrit.



Abandon












342. (1) Paragraph 37(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









342. (1) L’alinéa 37(1)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) the application does not conform to the requirements of subsection 30(2);









a) la demande ne satisfait pas aux exigences du paragraphe 30(2);














(2) Subsection 37(1) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (b), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and by replacing the portion after paragraph (c) with the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 37(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa c), de ce qui suit :














(d) the trademark is not distinctive.






If the Registrar is not so satisfied, the Registrar shall cause the application to be advertised in the prescribed manner.









d) la marque de commerce n’est pas distinctive.














(3) Section 37 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):









(3) L’article 37 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (3), de ce qui suit :












Withdrawal of advertisement



(4) If, after the application has been advertised but before the trademark is registered, the Registrar is satisfied that the application should not have been advertised or was incorrectly advertised and the Registrar considers it reasonable to do so, the Registrar may withdraw the advertisement. If the Registrar withdraws the advertisement, the application is deemed never to have been advertised.









(4) Si, après l’annonce de la demande, mais avant l’enregistrement de la marque de commerce, il est convaincu que la demande n’aurait pas dû être annoncée ou l’a été incorrectement, le registraire peut, s’il l’estime raisonnable, retirer l’annonce; le cas échéant la demande est réputée ne jamais avoir été annoncée.



Retrait de l’annonce












343. (1) Paragraph 38(2)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









343. (1) L’alinéa 38(2)a) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(a) that the application does not conform to the requirements of subsection 30(2), without taking into account if it meets the requirement in subsection 30(3);









a) la demande ne satisfait pas aux exigences du paragraphe 30(2), compte non tenu de la conformité au paragraphe 30(3) de l’état que contient celle-ci;














(2) Subsection 38(2) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the following after paragraph (d):









(2) Le paragraphe 38(2) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa d), de ce qui suit :














(e) that, at the filing date of the application in Canada, the applicant was not using and did not propose to use the trademark in Canada in association with the goods or services specified in the application; or






(f) that, at the filing date of the application in Canada, the applicant was not entitled to use the trademark in Canada in association with those goods or services.









e) à la date de production de la demande au Canada, le requérant n’employait pas ni ne projetait d’employer la marque de commerce au Canada en liaison avec les produits ou services spécifiés dans la demande;






f) à la date de production de la demande au Canada, le requérant n’avait pas le droit d’employer la marque de commerce au Canada en liaison avec ces produits ou services.












1993, c. 15, s. 66(2)



(3) Subsections 38(6) to (8) of the Act are replaced by the following:









(3) Les paragraphes 38(6) à (8) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, par. 66(2)










Power to strike



(6) At the applicant’s request, the Registrar may — at any time before the day on which the applicant files a counter statement — strike all or part of the statement of opposition if the statement or part of it








(a) is not based on any of the grounds set out in subsection (2); or








(b) does not set out a ground of opposition in sufficient detail to enable the applicant to reply to it.









(6) Avant le jour où le requérant produit la contre-déclaration, le registraire peut, à la demande de celui-ci, radier tout ou partie de la déclaration d’opposition dans l’un ou l’autre des cas suivants :



Pouvoir du registraire




a) la déclaration ou la partie en cause de celle-ci n’est pas fondée sur l’un des motifs énoncés au paragraphe (2);








b) la déclaration ou la partie en cause de celle-ci ne contient pas assez de détails au sujet de l’un ou l’autre des motifs pour permettre au requérant d’y répondre.














Counter statement



(7) The applicant shall file a counter statement with the Registrar and serve a copy on the opponent in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time after a copy of the statement of opposition has been forwarded to the applicant. The counter statement need only state that the applicant intends to respond to the opposition.









(7) Le requérant produit auprès du registraire une contre-déclaration et en signifie, dans le délai prescrit après qu’une déclaration d’opposition lui a été envoyée, copie à l’opposant de la manière prescrite. La contre-déclaration peut se limiter à énoncer l’intention du requérant de répondre à l’opposition.



Contre-déclaration










Evidence and hearing



(8) Both the opponent and the applicant shall be given an opportunity, in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, to submit evidence and to make representations to the Registrar unless








(a) the opposition is withdrawn or deemed under subsection (10) to have been withdrawn; or








(b) the application is abandoned or deemed under subsection (11) to have been abandoned.









(8) Il est fourni, selon les modalités prescrites, à l’opposant et au requérant l’occasion de soumettre la preuve sur laquelle ils s’appuient et de se faire entendre par le registraire, sauf dans les cas suivants :



Preuve et audition




a) l’opposition est retirée ou, au titre du paragraphe (10), réputée l’être;








b) la demande est abandonnée ou, au titre du paragraphe (11), réputée l’être.














Service



(9) The opponent and the applicant shall, in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, serve on each other any evidence and written representations that they submit to the Registrar.









(9) L’opposant et le requérant signifient à l’autre partie, selon les modalités prescrites, la preuve et les observations écrites qu’ils ont présentées au registraire.



Signification










Deemed withdrawal of opposition



(10) The opposition is deemed to have been withdrawn if, in the prescribed circumstances, the opponent does not submit and serve either evidence under subsection (8) or a statement that the opponent does not wish to submit evidence.









(10) Si, dans les circonstances prescrites, l’opposant omet de soumettre et de signifier la preuve visée au paragraphe (8) ou une déclaration énonçant son désir de ne pas soumettre de preuve, l’opposition est réputée retirée.



Retrait de l’opposition










Deemed abandonment of application



(11) The application is deemed to have been abandoned if the applicant does not file and serve a counter statement within the time referred to in subsection (7) or if, in the prescribed circumstances, the applicant does not submit and serve either evidence under subsection (8) or a statement that the applicant does not wish to submit evidence.









(11) Si le requérant omet de produire et de signifier une contre-déclaration dans le délai visé au paragraphe (7) ou si, dans les circonstances prescrites, il omet de soumettre et de signifier la preuve visée au paragraphe (8) ou une déclaration énonçant son désir de ne pas soumettre de preuve, la demande est réputée abandonnée.



Abandon de la demande










Decision



(12) After considering the evidence and representations of the opponent and the applicant, the Registrar shall refuse the application, reject the opposition, or refuse the application with respect to one or more of the goods or services specified in it and reject the opposition with respect to the others. He or she shall notify the parties of the decision and the reasons for it.









(12) Après avoir examiné la preuve et les observations des parties, le registraire rejette la demande, rejette l’opposition ou rejette la demande à l’égard de l’un ou plusieurs des produits ou services spécifiés dans celle-ci et rejette l’opposition à l’égard des autres. Il notifie aux parties sa décision motivée.



Décision










1993, c. 15, s. 67



344. Section 39 of the Act is replaced by the following:









344. L’article 39 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 67










Divisional application



39. (1) After having filed an application for the registration of a trademark, an applicant may limit the original application to one or more of the goods or services that were within its scope and file a divisional application for the registration of the same trademark in association with any other goods or services that were








(a) within the scope of the original application on its filing date; and








(b) within the scope of the original application as advertised, if the divisional application is filed on or after the day on which the application is advertised under subsection 37(1).









39. (1) Après avoir produit la demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce, le requérant peut restreindre cette demande originale à l’un ou plusieurs des produits ou services visés par celle-ci et produire une demande divisionnaire pour l’enregistrement de la même marque de commerce en liaison avec d’autres produits ou services qui étaient visés par la demande originale à la date de sa production et, si la demande divisionnaire est produite le jour où la demande originale est annoncée en application du paragraphe 37(1) ou après ce jour, visés par celle-ci dans sa version annoncée.



Demande divisionnaire










Identification



(2) A divisional application shall indicate that it is a divisional application and shall, in the prescribed manner, identify the corresponding original application.









(2) La demande divisionnaire précise qu’il s’agit d’une demande divisionnaire et indique, de la façon prescrite, la demande originale correspondante.



Précisions










Separate application



(3) A divisional application is a separate application, including with respect to the payment of any fees.









(3) La demande divisionnaire constitue une demande distincte, notamment pour le paiement des droits.



Demande distincte










Filing date



(4) A divisional application’s filing date is deemed to be the original application’s filing date.









(4) La date de production de la demande divisionnaire est réputée être celle de la demande originale.



Date de la demande divisionnaire










Division of divisional application



(5) A divisional application may itself be divided under subsection (1), in which case this section applies as if that divisional application were an original application.









(5) La demande divisionnaire peut elle-même être divisée en vertu du paragraphe (1), auquel cas, le présent article s’applique au même titre que si cette demande était la demande originale.



Division d’une demande divisionnaire










1993, c. 15, s. 68, c. 44, ss. 231(2) and (3); 1999, c. 31, s. 210(F)



345. Section 40 of the Act is replaced by the following:









345. L’article 40 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 68, ch. 44, par. 231(2) et (3); 1999, ch. 31, art. 210(F)










Registration of trademarks



40. When an application for the registration of a trademark either has not been opposed and the time for the filing of a statement of opposition has expired, or has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in favour of the applicant, the Registrar shall register the trademark in the name of the applicant and issue a certificate of its registration or, if an appeal is taken, shall act in accordance with the final judgment given in the appeal.









40. Lorsqu’une demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce n’a pas fait l’objet d’une opposition et que le délai prévu pour la production d’une déclaration d’opposition est expiré, ou lorsqu’il y a eu opposition et que celle-ci a été décidée en faveur du requérant, le registraire enregistre la marque de commerce au nom du requérant et délivre un certificat de son enregistrement ou, en cas d’appel, se conforme au jugement définitif rendu en l’espèce.



Enregistrement des marques de commerce












346. (1) The portion of subsection 41(1) of the Act before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:









346. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 41(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa b) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Amendments to register



41. (1) The Registrar may, on application by the registered owner of a trademark made in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, make any of the following amendments to the register:








(a) correct any error or enter any change in the name, address or description of the registered owner;









41. (1) Le registraire peut, à la demande du propriétaire inscrit d’une marque de commerce présentée de la façon prescrite et sur paiement du droit prescrit, apporter au registre l’une ou l’autre des modifications suivantes :



Modifications au registre




a) la correction de toute erreur ou l’inscription de tout changement dans les nom, adresse ou désignation du propriétaire inscrit;
















(2) Subsection 41(1) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (d), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (e) and by adding the following after paragraph (e):









(2) Le paragraphe 41(1) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :














(f) subject to the regulations, merge registrations of the trademark that stem, under section 39, from the same original application.









f) sous réserve des règlements, la fusion de tout enregistrement de la marque de commerce découlant d’une même demande originale divisée sous le régime de l’article 39.














(3) Section 41 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):









(3) L’article 41 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (2), de ce qui suit :












Obvious error



(3) The Registrar may, within six months after an entry in the register is made, correct any error in the entry that is obvious from the documents relating to the registered trademark in question that are, at the time that the entry is made, on file in the Registrar’s office.









(3) Dans les six mois après avoir fait une inscription au registre, le registraire peut corriger toute erreur dans celle-ci qui ressort de façon évidente à la lecture du dossier du registraire, dans sa version au moment de l’inscription, concernant la marque de commerce déposée en cause.



Erreur évidente










Removal of registration



(4) The Registrar may, within three months after the registration of a trademark, remove the registration from the register if the Registrar registered the trademark without considering a previously filed request for an extension of time to file a statement of opposition.









(4) S’il a enregistré une marque de commerce sans tenir compte d’une demande de prolongation du délai préalablement déposée pour produire une déclaration d’opposition, le registraire peut, dans les trois mois qui suivent l’enregistrement, supprimer celui-ci du registre.



Suppression de l’enregistrement












347. Section 42 of the Act is repealed.









347. L’article 42 de la même loi est abrogé.














348. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 44:









348. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 44, de ce qui suit :












Registrar may require amendment



44.1 (1) The Registrar may give notice to the registered owner of a trademark requiring the owner to furnish the Registrar, in the prescribed time and manner, with a statement of the goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered, in which those goods or services are grouped in the manner described in subsection 30(3).









44.1 (1) Le registraire peut donner au propriétaire inscrit d’une marque de commerce un avis lui enjoignant de lui fournir, selon les modalités prescrites, un état des produits ou services à l’égard desquels la marque est enregistrée, groupés de la façon prévue au paragraphe 30(3).



Modification exigée par le registraire










Amendments to register



(2) The Registrar may amend the register in accordance with the statement furnished under subsection (1).









(2) Le registraire peut modifier le registre en conformité avec l’état qui lui est fourni selon le paragraphe (1).



Modification du registre










Failure to furnish statement



(3) If the statement required by subsection (1) is not furnished, the Registrar shall by a further notice fix a reasonable time after which, if the statement is not furnished, the Registrar may expunge the registration of the trademark or refuse to renew it.









(3) Lorsque l’état n’est pas fourni, le registraire fixe, au moyen d’un nouvel avis, un délai raisonnable après lequel, si l’état n’est toujours pas fourni, il pourra radier l’enregistrement de la marque de commerce ou refuser de le renouveler.



Lorsque l’état n’est pas fourni










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










1994, c. 47, s. 200(1)



349. Subsections 45(1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:









349. Les paragraphes 45(1) et (2) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1994, ch.47, par. 200(1)










Registrar may request evidence of use



45. (1) After three years beginning on the day on which a trademark is registered, unless the Registrar sees good reason to the contrary, the Registrar shall, at the written request of any person who pays the prescribed fee — or may, on his or her own initiative — give notice to the registered owner of the trademark requiring the registered owner to furnish within three months an affidavit or a statutory declaration showing, with respect to all the goods or services specified in the registration or to those that may be specified in the notice, whether the trademark was in use in Canada at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the notice and, if not, the date when it was last so in use and the reason for the absence of such use since that date.









45. (1) Après trois années à compter de la date d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce, sur demande écrite présentée par une personne qui verse les droits prescrits, le registraire donne au propriétaire inscrit, à moins qu’il ne voie une raison valable à l’effet contraire, un avis lui enjoignant de fournir, dans les trois mois, un affidavit ou une déclaration solennelle indiquant, à l’égard de chacun des produits ou de chacun des services que spécifie l’enregistrement ou que l’avis peut spécifier, si la marque de commerce a été employée au Canada à un moment quelconque au cours des trois ans précédant la date de l’avis et, dans la négative, la date où elle a été ainsi employée en dernier et la raison pour laquelle elle ne l’a pas été depuis cette date. Il peut cependant, après trois années à compter de la date de l’enregistrement, donner l’avis de sa propre initiative.



Le registraire peut exiger une preuve d’emploi










Form of evidence



(2) The Registrar shall not receive any evidence other than the affidavit or statutory declaration, but may receive representations made in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time by the registered owner of the trademark or by the person at whose request the notice was given.









(2) Le registraire ne peut recevoir aucune preuve autre que cet affidavit ou cette déclaration solennelle, mais il peut recevoir des observations faites — selon les modalités prescrites — par le propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce ou par la personne à la demande de laquelle l’avis a été donné.



Forme de la preuve










Service



(2.1) The registered owner of the trademark shall, in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, serve on the person at whose request the notice was given any evidence that the registered owner submits to the Registrar. Those parties shall, in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, serve on each other any written representations that they submit to the Registrar.









(2.1) Le propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce signifie, selon les modalités prescrites, à la personne à la demande de laquelle l’avis a été donné, la preuve qu’il présente au registraire, et chacune des parties signifie à l’autre, selon les modalités prescrites, les observations écrites qu’elle présente au registraire.



Signification










Failure to serve



(2.2) The Registrar is not required to consider any evidence or written representations that was not served in accordance with subsection (2.1).









(2.2) Le registraire n’est pas tenu d’examiner la preuve ou les observations écrites qui n’ont pas été signifiées conformément au paragraphe (2.1).



Absence de signification










1992, c. 1, s. 135(1)



350. Section 46 of the Act is replaced by the following:









350. L’article 46 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1992, ch. 1, par. 135(1)










Term



46. (1) Subject to any other provision of this Act, the registration of a trademark is on the register for an initial period of 10 years beginning on the day of the registration and for subsequent renewal periods of 10 years if, for each renewal, the prescribed renewal fee is paid within the prescribed period.









46. (1) Sous réserve de toute autre disposition de la présente loi, l’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce figure au registre pendant une période initiale de dix ans à compter de la date d’enregistrement et pendant une ou plusieurs périodes de renouvellement de dix ans si, pour chacune de ces périodes de renouvellement, le droit de renouvellement prescrit est versé dans le délai prescrit.



Durée










Notice to renew



(2) If the initial period or a renewal period expires and the prescribed renewal fee has not been paid, the Registrar shall send a notice to the registered owner stating that if the fee is not paid within the prescribed period, the registration will be expunged.









(2) Si la période initiale ou la période de renouvellement expire sans que le droit de renouvellement prescrit ne soit versé, le registraire envoie au propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce un avis portant que, si le droit n’est pas versé dans le délai prescrit, l’enregistrement sera radié.



Avis de renouvellement










Failure to renew



(3) If the prescribed renewal fee is not paid within the prescribed period, the Registrar shall expunge the registration. The registration is deemed to have been expunged at the expiry of the initial period or the last renewal period.









(3) Si le droit de renouvellement prescrit n’est pas versé dans le délai prescrit, le registraire radie l’enregistrement. L’enregistrement est alors réputé avoir été radié à l’expiration de la période initiale ou de la dernière période de renouvellement.



Non-renouvellement










Renewal



(4) If the prescribed renewal fee is paid within the prescribed period, the renewal period begins at the expiry of the initial period or the last renewal period.









(4) Si le droit de renouvellement prescrit est versé dans le délai prescrit, la période de renouvellement commence à l’expiration de la période initiale ou de la dernière période de renouvellement.



Entrée en vigueur du renouvellement










Extension



(5) A registered owner is not permitted to apply under section 47 for an extension of the prescribed period until that period has expired, and the Registrar is not permitted to extend the period by more than seven days.









(5) Le propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce ne peut demander la prolongation, au titre de l’article 47, du délai prescrit qu’après l’expiration de celui-ci. Le registraire ne peut le prolonger que d’au plus sept jours.



Prolongation










Prescribed period



(6) For the purposes of this section, the prescribed period begins at least six months before the expiry of the initial period or the renewal period and ends no earlier than six months after the expiry of that period.









(6) Le délai prescrit pour l’application du présent article commence au moins six mois avant l’expiration de la période initiale ou de la période de renouvellement et prend fin au plus tôt six mois après l’expiration de cette période.



Délai prescrit












351. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 47:









351. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 47, de ce qui suit :












Proceeding under section 45



47.1 (1) The Registrar shall grant an extension of any time limit fixed under this Act in the context of a proceeding commenced by the Registrar, on his or her own initiative, under section 45, if the extension is requested after the expiry of the time limit and within two months after its expiry.









47.1 (1) Lorsque, de sa propre initiative, il amorce une procédure au titre de l’article 45, le registraire prolonge tout délai applicable à celle-ci prévu sous le régime de la présente loi sur demande présentée à cet effet dans les deux mois suivant son expiration.



Procédure visée à l’article 45










One time extension



(2) No extension under subsection (1) shall be granted more than once.









(2) Aucun délai ne peut être prolongé plus d’une fois au titre du paragraphe (1).



Une seule prolongation












352. Subsection 48(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









352. Le paragraphe 48(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Transfer of application



(3) The Registrar shall, subject to the regulations, record the transfer of an application for the registration of a trademark on the request of the applicant or, on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar of the transfer, on the request of a transferee of the application.









(3) Sous réserve des règlements, le registraire inscrit le transfert de toute demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce sur demande du requérant ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert qu’il juge satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire de la demande.



Inscription du transfert — demande d’enregistrement










Transfer of trademark



(4) The Registrar shall, subject to the regulations, register the transfer of any registered trademark on the request of the registered owner or, on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar of the transfer, on the request of a transferee of the trademark.









(4) Sous réserve des règlements, le registraire inscrit le transfert de toute marque de commerce déposée sur demande du propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert qu’il juge satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire de la marque.



Inscription du transfert —marque de commerce










Removal of recording or registration



(5) The Registrar shall remove the recording or the registration of the transfer referred to in subsection (3) or (4) on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar that the transfer should not have been recorded or registered.









(5) Le registraire supprime l’inscription du transfert visé aux paragraphes (3) ou (4) à la réception d’une preuve qu’il juge satisfaisante que le transfert n’aurait pas dû être inscrit.



Suppression de l’inscription du transfert












353. Section 49 of the Act and the heading before it are replaced by the following:









353. L’article 49 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












CHANGE OF PURPOSE IN USE OF TRADEMARK









CHANGEMENT LIÉ À L’EMPLOI D’UNE MARQUE DE COMMERCE












Change of purpose



49. If a sign or combination of signs is used by a person as a trademark for any of the purposes or in any of the manners mentioned in the definition “certification mark” or “trademark” in section 2, no application for the registration of the trademark shall be refused and no registration of the trademark shall be expunged, amended or held invalid merely on the ground that the person or a predecessor in title uses the trademark or has used it for any other of those purposes or in any other of those manners.









49. Si une personne emploie un signe ou une combinaison de signes comme marque de commerce à l’une des fins ou de l’une des manières mentionnées aux définitions de « marque de certification » ou « marque de commerce » à l’article 2, aucune demande d’enregistrement de la marque de commerce ne peut être refusée, et aucun enregistrement de la marque de commerce ne peut être radié, modifié ou considéré comme invalide pour le seul motif que cette personne ou un prédécesseur en titre l’emploie ou l’a employée à une autre de ces fins ou d’une autre de ces manières.



Autres fins












354. Subsection 57(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









354. Le paragraphe 57(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Exclusive jurisdiction of Federal Court



57. (1) The Federal Court has exclusive original jurisdiction, on the application of the Registrar or of any person interested, to order that any entry in the register be struck out or amended on the ground that at the date of the application the entry as it appears on the register does not accurately express or define the existing rights of the person appearing to be the registered owner of the trademark.









57. (1) La Cour fédérale a une compétence initiale exclusive, sur demande du registraire ou de toute personne intéressée, pour ordonner qu’une inscription dans le registre soit biffée ou modifiée, parce que, à la date de cette demande, l’inscription figurant au registre n’exprime ou ne définit pas exactement les droits existants de la personne paraissant être le propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce.



Compétence exclusive de la Cour fédérale












355. Section 61 of the Act is renumbered as subsection 61(1) and is amended by adding the following:









355. L’article 61 de la même loi devient le paragraphe 61(1) et est modifié par adjonction de ce qui suit :












Judgment sent by parties



(2) A person who makes a request to the Registrar relating to a judgment or order made by the Federal Court, the Federal Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court of Canada in a proceeding to which they were a party shall, at the request of the Registrar, send a copy of that judgment or order to the Registrar.









(2) La personne qui présente au registraire une demande relative à un jugement ou à une ordonnance rendus par la Cour fédérale, la Cour d’appel fédérale ou la Cour suprême du Canada dans une instance à laquelle elle était partie fournit au registraire, à la demande de celui-ci, copie du jugement ou de l’ordonnance en question.



Fourniture de jugements par les parties












356. Section 64 of the Act is replaced by the following:









356. L’article 64 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Electronic form and means



64. (1) Subject to the regulations, any document, information or fee that is provided to the Registrar under this Act may be provided in any electronic form, and by any electronic means, that is specified by the Registrar.









64. (1) Sous réserve des règlements, les documents, renseignements ou droits fournis au registraire sous le régime de la présente loi peuvent lui être fournis sous la forme électronique — ou en utilisant les moyens électroniques — qu’il précise.



Moyens et forme électroniques










Collection, storage, etc.



(2) Subject to the regulations, the Registrar may use electronic means to create, collect, receive, store, transfer, distribute, publish, certify or otherwise deal with documents or information.









(2) Sous réserve des règlements, le registraire peut faire usage d’un moyen électronique pour créer, recueillir, recevoir, mettre en mémoire, transférer, diffuser, publier, certifier ou traiter de quelque autre façon des documents ou des renseignements.



Collecte, mise en mémoire, etc.










Definition



(3) In this section, “electronic”, in reference to a form or means, includes optical, magnetic and other similar forms or means.









(3) Au présent article, la mention de moyens électroniques ou de la forme électronique vise aussi, respectivement, les moyens ou formes optiques ou magnétiques ainsi que les autres moyens ou formes semblables.



Moyens et formes optiques ou magnétiques












357. Section 65 of the Act is replaced by the following:









357. L’article 65 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Regulations



65. The Governor in Council may make regulations for carrying into effect the purposes and provisions of this Act and, in particular, may make regulations








(a) respecting the form of the register to be kept under this Act, and of the entries to be made in it;








(b) respecting applications to the Registrar and the processing of those applications;








(c) respecting the manner in which the goods or services referred to in paragraph 30(2)(a) are to be described;








(d) respecting the merger of registrations under paragraph 41(1)(f), including, for the purpose of renewal under section 46, the deemed day of registration or last renewal;








(e) respecting the recording or registration of transfers, licences, disclaimers, judgments or other documents relating to any trademark;








(f) respecting the maintenance of the list of trademark agents and the entry and removal of the names of persons and firms on the list, including the qualifications that must be met and the conditions that must be fulfilled to have a name entered on the list and to maintain the name on the list;








(g) respecting certificates of registration;








(h) respecting the procedure by and form in which an application may be made to the Minister, as defined in section 11.11, requesting the Minister to publish a statement referred to in subsection 11.12(2);








(i) respecting proceedings under sections 38 and 45, including documents relating to those proceedings;








(j) respecting the payment of fees to the Registrar and the amount of those fees;








(k) respecting the provision of documents and information to the Registrar, including the time at which they are deemed to be received by the Registrar;








(l) respecting correspondence between the Registrar and any other person;








(m) respecting the grouping of goods or services according to the classes of the Nice Classification and the numbering of those classes; and








(n) prescribing anything that by this Act is to be prescribed.









65. Le gouverneur en conseil peut prendre des règlements d’application de la présente loi, notamment :



Règlements




a) concernant la forme du registre à tenir en conformité avec la présente loi, et des inscriptions à y faire;








b) concernant les demandes au registraire et leur traitement;








c) concernant la façon de décrire les produits ou services visés à l’alinéa 30(2)a);








d) concernant la fusion d’enregistrements sous le régime de l’alinéa 41(1)f), notamment sur la date réputée, aux fins du renouvellement prévu à l’article 46, de l’enregistrement ou du dernier renouvellement;








e) concernant l’inscription et l’enregistrement des transferts, autorisations, désistements, jugements ou autres documents relatifs à toute marque de commerce;








f) concernant la façon de tenir la liste des agents de marques de commerce ainsi que l’inscription ou le retrait des noms de ceux-ci et les conditions à remplir pour l’inscription et le maintien de leurs noms;








g) concernant les certificats d’enregistrement;








h) concernant les modalités de forme et de procédure applicables aux demandes à adresser au ministre — au sens de l’article 11.11 — pour la publication de l’énoncé d’intention visé au paragraphe 11.12(2);








i) concernant les procédures visées aux articles 38 et 45, notamment sur les documents relatifs à celles-ci;








j) concernant le versement de droits au registraire et le montant de ces droits;








k) concernant la fourniture de documents ou de renseignements au registraire, notamment sur le moment où il est réputé les avoir reçus;








l) concernant les communications entre le registraire et toute autre personne;








m) concernant le groupement de produits ou services selon les classes de la classification de Nice et la numérotation de ces classes;








n) prescrivant toute autre chose qui doit être prescrite en vertu de la présente loi.
















358. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 65:









358. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 65, de ce qui suit :












Regulations — Madrid Protocol and Singapore Treaty



65.1 The Governor in Council may make regulations for carrying into effect








(a) despite anything in this Act, the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks, adopted at Madrid on June 27, 1989, including any amendments, modifications and revisions made from time to time to which Canada is a party; and








(b) the Singapore Treaty on the Law of Trademarks, done at Singapore on March 27, 2006, including any amendments and revisions made from time to time to which Canada is a party.









65.1 Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement :



Règlement —Protocole de Madrid et Traité de Singapour




a) par dérogation aux autres dispositions de la présente loi, prendre des mesures pour mettre en oeuvre le Protocole relatif à l’Arrangement de Madrid concernant l’enregistrement international des marques, adopté à Madrid le 27 juin 1989, ainsi que les modifications et révisions subséquentes apportées à celui-ci et auxquelles le Canada est partie;








b) prendre des mesures pour mettre en oeuvre le Traité de Singapour sur le droit des marques, fait à Singapour le 27 mars 2006, ainsi que les modifications et révisions subséquentes apportées à celui-ci et aux-quelles le Canada est partie.














1993, c. 15, s. 71



359. Section 69 of the Act and the heading before it are replaced by the following:









359. L’article 69 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 15, art. 71










TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS









DISPOSITIONS TRANSITOIRES












Application not advertised



69. An application for registration in respect of which all of the items set out in subsection 33(1), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, have been received by the Registrar before the day on which that section 339 comes into force, and that has not been advertised under subsection 37(1) before that day shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act other than section 31, subsection 33(1) and section 34, as enacted or amended by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1; and








(b) section 34, as it read immediately before the day on which section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force.









69. La demande d’enregistrement à l’égard de laquelle le registraire a reçu, avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, tous les éléments énumérés au paragraphe 33(1), dans sa version édictée par cet article, et qui n’a pas été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant cette date est régie, à la fois :



Demande non annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception de l’article 31, du paragraphe 33(1) et de l’article 34, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014;








b) par l’article 34 de la présente loi, dans sa version antérieure à cette date.














Application advertised



70. (1) An application for registration that has been advertised under subsection 37(1) before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, other than subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (8) and sections 39 and 40; and








(b) the definition “Nice Classification” in section 2, subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (12), sections 39 and 40 and subsections 48(3) and (5), as enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









70. (1) La demande d’enregistrement qui a été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 342 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 est régie, à la fois :



Demande annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur version antérieure à cette date, à l’exception des paragraphes 6(2) à (4), des articles 28 et 36, des paragraphes 38(6) à (8) et des articles 39 et 40;








b) par la définition de « classification de Nice », à l’article 2, les paragraphes 6(2) à (4), les articles 28 et 36, les paragraphes 38(6) à (12), les articles 39 et 40 et les paragraphes 48(3) et (5), édictés par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.














Regulations



(2) For greater certainty, a regulation made under section 65, as enacted by section 357 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, applies to an application referred to in subsection (1), unless the regulation provides otherwise.









(2) Il est entendu que tout règlement pris en vertu de l’article 65, édicté par l’article 357 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, s’applique à la demande visée au paragraphe (1), sauf indication contraire prévue par ce règlement.



Règlements










Nice Classification



(3) Despite subsection (1), the Registrar may require an applicant to amend the statement of goods or services contained in an application referred to in subsection (1) so that the goods or services are grouped in the manner described in subsection 30(3), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Malgré le paragraphe (1), le registraire peut exiger du requérant la modification de l’état des produits ou services contenu dans la demande visée au paragraphe (1) pour rendre celui-ci conforme au paragraphe 30(3), édicté par l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Classification de Nice










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










Declaration of use



71. For greater certainty, an applicant is not required to submit a declaration of use referred to in subsection 40(2), as that subsection read immediately before the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in order for the Registrar to register the trademark and issue a certificate of registration.









71. Il est entendu que le requérant n’a pas à fournir la déclaration visée au paragraphe 40(2), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, pour que le registraire enregistre la marque de commerce et délivre un certificat de son enregistrement.



Déclaration d’emploi










Registered trademarks — applications filed before coming into force



72. Any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered on or after that day on the basis of an application filed before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accord-ance with the provisions of this Act.









72. Toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée à compter de cette date au titre d’une demande produite avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée — demande produite avant l’entrée en vigueur










Registered trademarks



73. (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4), any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act.









73. (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (4), toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée










Application of paragraph 26(2)(e.1)



(2) Paragraph 26(2)(e.1) does not apply to a trademark referred to in subsection (1) unless the register is amended under section 44.1.









(2) L’alinéa 26(2)e.1) ne s’applique pas aux marques de commerce visées au paragraphe (1), à moins que le registre ne soit modifié en vertu de l’article 44.1.



Application de l’alinéa 26(2)e.1)










Amending register



(3) The Registrar may amend the register kept under section 26 to reflect the amendments to this Act that are made by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Le registraire peut apporter des modifications au registre qu’il tient en application de l’article 26 afin de tenir compte des modifications apportées à la présente loi par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Modifications au registre










Subsection 46(1)



(4) Subsection 46(1), as it read immediately before the day on which section 350 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, continues to apply to a registration that is on the register on the day before the day on which that section comes into force until the registration is renewed.









(4) Le paragraphe 46(1), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 350 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, continue de s’appliquer aux enregistrements qui figurent au registre la veille de l’entrée en vigueur de cet article, et ce, jusqu’à leur renouvellement.



Paragraphe 46(1)










Replacement of “wares”



360. The Act is amended by replacing “wares”, wherever it occurs, with “goods”.









360. Dans la même loi, « marchandises » est remplacé par « produits », avec les adaptations nécessaires.



Remplacement de « marchan-dises »










Replacement of “trade-mark”



361. The English version of the Act is amended by replacing “trade-mark”, “trade-marks”, “Trade-mark” and “Trade-marks” with “trademark”, “trademarks”, “Trademark” and “Trademarks”, respectively.









361. Dans la version anglaise de la même loi, « trade-mark », « trade-marks », « Trade-mark » et « Trade-marks » sont respectivement remplacés par « trademark », « trademarks », « Trademark » et « Trademarks ».



Remplacement de « trade-mark » dans la version anglaise










Replacement of “trade-name”



362. The English version of the Act is amended by replacing “trade-name”, wherever it occurs, with “trade name”.









362. Dans la version anglaise de la même loi, « trade-name » est remplacé par « trade name ».



Remplacement de « trade-name » dans la version anglaise










Replacement of “utiliser”, etc.



363. The French version of the Act is amended by replacing “utiliser”, “utilisé”, “utilisée” and “utilisation” with “employer”, “employé”, “employée” and “emploi”, respectively, with any grammatical changes that the circumstances require, in the following provisions:








(a) the portion of paragraph 7(d) before subparagraph (i);








(b) paragraph 9(1)(f);








(c) section 11.1;








(d) the portion of subsection 11.14(2) before paragraph (a);








(e) the portion of subsection 11.15(2) before paragraph (a);








(f) subsections 11.16(1) and (2);








(g) the portion of subsection 11.17(1) before paragraph (a);








(h) subsections 11.18(1) to (4);








(i) subsection 11.19(1);








(j) the portion of section 11.2 before paragraph (a);








(k) subsection 17(2); and








(l) paragraph 20(1)(a) and subsection 20(2).









363. Dans les passages ci-après de la version française de la même loi, « utiliser », « utilisé », « utilisée » et « utilisation » sont respectivement remplacés par « employer », « employé », « employée » et « emploi », avec les adaptations nécessaires :



Remplacement de « utiliser », etc.




a) le passage de l’alinéa 7d) précédant le sous-alinéa (i);








b) l’alinéa 9(1)f);








c) l’article 11.1;








d) le passage du paragraphe 11.14(2) précédant l’alinéa a);








e) le passage du paragraphe 11.15(2) précédant l’alinéa a);








f) les paragraphes 11.16(1) et (2);








g) le passage du paragraphe 11.17(1) précédant l’alinéa a);








h) les paragraphes 11.18(1) à (4);








i) le paragraphe 11.19(1);








j) le passage de l’article 11.2 précédant l’alinéa a);








k) le paragraphe 17(2);








l) l’alinéa 20(1)a) et le paragraphe 20(2).














Consequential Amendments









Modifications corrélatives










2007, c. 25



Olympic and Paralympic Marks Act









Loi sur les marques olympiques et paralympiques



2007, ch. 25












364. Paragraphs 5(1)(a) and (b) of the Olympic and Paralympic Marks Act are replaced by the following:









364. Les alinéas 5(1)a) et b) de la Loi sur les marques olympiques et paralympiques sont remplacés par ce qui suit :














(a) of any offending goods, packaging, labels and advertising material; and






(b) of any equipment used to apply to those goods, packaging, labels or advertising material a mark whose adoption or use is prohibited under section 3.









a) des produits, emballages, étiquettes et matériel publicitaire en cause;






b) de tout équipement employé pour apposer à ces produits, emballages, étiquettes ou matériel publicitaire une marque dont l’adoption ou l’emploi est interdit par l’article 3.












Replacement of “wares”



365. The Act is amended by replacing “wares”, wherever it occurs, with “goods”.









365. Dans la même loi, « marchandises » est remplacé par « produits », avec les adaptations nécessaires.



Remplacement de « marchan-dises »










Terminology









Modifications terminologiques












Replacement of “trade-mark” in other Acts



366. (1) Unless the context requires otherwise, “trade-mark”, “trade-marks”, “Trade-mark”, “Trade-marks”, “trade mark” and “trade marks” are replaced by “trademark”, “trademarks”, “Trademark” or “Trademarks”, as the case may be, in the English version of any Act of Parliament, other than this Act and the Trademarks Act.









366. (1) Sauf indication contraire du contexte, dans la version anglaise des lois fédérales, à l’exception de la présente loi et de la Loi sur les marques de commerce, « trade-mark », « trade-marks », « Trade-mark », « Trade-marks », « trade mark » et « trade marks » sont remplacés par « trademark », « trademarks », « Trademark » ou « Trademarks », selon le cas.



Remplacement de « trade-mark » dans les autres lois fédérales










Bills before Parliament



(2) Subsection (1) also applies to the provisions of any bill introduced in the 2nd session of the 41st Parliament that receives royal assent.









(2) Le paragraphe (1) s’applique aux dispositions de tout projet de loi déposé au cours de la 2e session de la 41e législature qui reçoit la sanction royale.



Projets de loi au Parlement










Replacement of “trade-mark” in regulations



(3) Unless the context requires otherwise, “trade-mark”, “trade-marks”, “Trade-mark”, “Trade-marks”, “trade mark” and “trade marks”, are replaced by “trademark”, “trademarks”, “Trademark” or “Trademarks”, as the case may be, in the English version of any regulation, as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act.









(3) Sauf indication contraire du contexte, dans la version anglaise de tout règlement, au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires, « trade-mark », « trade-marks », « Trade-mark », « Trade-marks », « trade mark » et « trade marks » sont remplacés par « trademark », « trademarks », « Trademark » ou « Trademarks », selon le cas.



Remplacement de « trade-mark » dans les règlements










Coordinating Amendments









Dispositions de coordination












Bill C-8



367. (1) Subsections (2) to (103) apply if Bill C-8, introduced in the 2nd session of the 41st Parliament and entitled the Combating Counterfeit Products Act (in this section referred to as the “other Act”), receives royal assent.









367. (1) Les paragraphes (2) à (103) s’appliquent en cas de sanction du projet de loi C-8, déposé au cours de la 2e session de la 41e législature et intitulé Loi visant à combattre la contrefaçon de produits (appelé « autre loi » au présent article).



Projet de loi C-8












(2) If subsection 319(1) of this Act comes into force before subsection 7(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 7(2) is repealed.









(2) Si le paragraphe 319(1) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 7(2) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 7(2) est abrogé.














(3) If subsection 7(2) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 319(1) of this Act, then that subsection 319(1) is repealed.









(3) Si le paragraphe 7(2) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 319(1) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 319(1) est abrogé.














(4) If subsection 319(1) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 7(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 319(1) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 7(2) and subsection (2) applies as a consequence.









(4) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 319(1) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 7(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 319(1) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 7(2), le paragraphe (2) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(5) If subsection 7(1) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 319(3) of this Act, then that subsection 319(3) is repealed.









(5) Si le paragraphe 7(1) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 319(3) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 319(3) est abrogé.














(6) If subsection 319(3) of this Act comes into force before subsection 7(1) of the other Act, then






(a) that subsection 7(1) is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed; and






(b) the definition “package” in section 2 of the Trademarks Act is repealed.









(6) Si le paragraphe 319(3) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 7(1) de l’autre loi :






a) ce paragraphe 7(1) est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé;






b) la définition de « paquet » ou « colis », à l’article 2 de la Loi sur les marques de commerce, est abrogée.














(7) If subsection 7(1) of the other Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 319(3) of this Act, then that subsection 319(3) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 7(1) and subsection (6) applies as a consequence.









(7) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 7(1) de l’autre loi et celle du paragraphe 319(3) de la présente loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 319(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 7(1), le paragraphe (6) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(8) If subsection 319(4) of this Act comes into force before subsection 7(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 7(3) is replaced by the following:









(8) Si le paragraphe 319(4) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 7(3) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 7(3) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(3) The definition “distinctive” in section 2 of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) La définition de « distinctive », à l’article 2 de la même loi, est remplacée par ce qui suit :












“distinctive”« distinctive »



“distinctive”, in relation to a trademark, describes a trademark that actually distinguishes the goods or services in association with which it is used by its owner from the goods or services of others or that is adapted so to distinguish them;









« distinctive » Se dit de la marque de commerce qui distingue véritablement les produits ou services en liaison avec lesquels elle est employée par son propriétaire de ceux d’autres personnes, ou qui est adaptée à les distinguer ainsi.



« distinctive »“distinctive”












(9) If subsection 319(4) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 7(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 319(4) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 7(3) and subsection (8) applies as a consequence.









(9) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 319(4) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 7(3) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 319(4) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 7(3), le paragraphe (8) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(10) If subsection 319(4) of this Act comes into force before subsection 7(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 7(4) is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed.









(10) Si le paragraphe 319(4) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 7(4) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 7(4) est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé.














(11) If subsection 319(4) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 7(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 319(4) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 7(4) and subsection (10) applies as a consequence.









(11) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 319(4) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 7(4) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 319(4) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 7(4), le paragraphe (10) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(12) If subsection 319(5) of this Act comes into force before subsection 7(5) of the other Act, then that subsection 7(5) is repealed.









(12) Si le paragraphe 319(5) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 7(5) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 7(5) est abrogé.














(13) If subsection 7(5) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 319(5) of this Act, then






(a) on the day on which that subsection 319(5) comes into force, the definition “proposed certification mark” in section 2 of the Trademarks Act is repealed; and






(b) that subsection 319(5) is replaced by the following:









(13) Si le paragraphe 7(5) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 319(5) de la présente loi :






a) à la date d’entrée en vigueur de ce paragraphe 319(5), la définition de « marque de certification projetée », à l’article 2 de la Loi sur les marques de commerce, est abrogée;






b) ce paragraphe 319(5) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(5) Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(5) L’article 2 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :












“Nice Classification”« classification de Nice »



“Nice Classification” means the classification established by the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, signed at Nice on June 15, 1957, including any amendments, modifications and revisions made from time to time to which Canada is a party;









« classification de Nice » La classification instituée par l’Arrangement de Nice concernant la classification internationale des produits et des services aux fins de l’enregistrement des marques, signé à Nice le 15 juin 1957, ainsi que les modifications et révisions subséquentes apportées à celui-ci et auxquelles le Canada est partie.



« classification de Nice »“Nice Classification”












(14) If subsection 319(5) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 7(5) of the other Act, then that subsection 319(5) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 7(5) and subsection (12) applies as a consequence.









(14) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 319(5) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 7(5) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 319(5) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 7(5), le paragraphe (12) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(15) If subsection 326(4) of this Act comes into force before subsection 15(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 15(4) is repealed.









(15) Si le paragraphe 326(4) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 15(4) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 15(4) est abrogé.














(16) If subsection 15(4) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 326(4) of this Act, then that subsection 326(4) is repealed.









(16) Si le paragraphe 15(4) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 326(4) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 326(4) est abrogé.














(17) If subsection 326(4) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 15(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 326(4) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 15(4), and subsection (15) applies as a consequence.









(17) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 326(4) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 15(4) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 326(4) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 15(4), le paragraphe (15) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(18) If section 327 of this Act comes into force before section 16 of the other Act, then that section 16 is repealed.









(18) Si l’article 327 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 16 de l’autre loi, cet article 16 est abrogé.














(19) If section 16 of the other Act comes into force before section 327 of this Act, then that section 327 is repealed.









(19) Si l’article 16 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 327 de la présente loi, cet article 327 est abrogé.














(20) If section 327 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 16 of the other Act, then that section 327 is deemed to have come into force before that section 16 and subsection (18) applies as a consequence.









(20) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 327 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 16 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 327 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 16, le paragraphe (18) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(21) If section 328 of this Act comes into force before section 17 of the other Act, then that section 17 is repealed.









(21) Si l’article 328 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 17 de l’autre loi, cet article 17 est abrogé.














(22) If section 328 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 17 of the other Act, then that section 17 is deemed to have come into force before that section 328.









(22) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 328 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 17 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 17 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 328.














(23) If subsection 330(2) of this Act comes into force before section 18 of the other Act, then that section 18 is repealed.









(23) Si le paragraphe 330(2) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 18 de l’autre loi, cet article 18 est abrogé.














(24) If subsection 330(2) of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 18 of the other Act, then that section 18 is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 330(2).









(24) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 330(2) de la présente loi et celle de l’article 18 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 18 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 330(2).














(25) If subsection 330(2) of this Act comes into force before paragraph 55(a) of the other Act, then that paragraph 55(a) is repealed.









(25) Si le paragraphe 330(2) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’alinéa 55a) de l’autre loi, cet alinéa 55a) est abrogé.














(26) If subsection 330(2) of this Act comes into force on the same day as paragraph 55(a) of the other Act, then that paragraph 55(a) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 330(2).









(26) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 330(2) de la présente loi et celle de l’alinéa 55a) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet alinéa 55a) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 330(2).














(27) If section 331 of this Act comes into force before section 20 of the other Act, then that section 20 is repealed.









(27) Si l’article 331 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 20 de l’autre loi, cet article 20 est abrogé.














(28) If section 20 of the other Act comes into force before section 331 of this Act, then that section 331 is replaced by the following:









(28) Si l’article 20 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 331 de la présente loi, cet article 331 est remplacé par ce qui suit :














331. The English version of section 18.1 of the Act is replaced by the following:









331. La version anglaise de l’article 18.1 de la même loi est remplacée par ce qui suit :












Not to limit art or industry



18.1 The registration of a trademark may be expunged by the Federal Court on the application of any person interested if the Court decides that the registration is likely to unreasonably limit the development of any art or industry.









18.1 The registration of a trademark may be expunged by the Federal Court on the application of any person interested if the Court decides that the registration is likely to unreasonably limit the development of any art or industry.



Not to limit art or industry












(29) If section 331 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 20 of the other Act, then that section 331 is deemed to have come into force before that section 20 and subsection (27) applies as a consequence.









(29) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 331 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 20 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 331 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 20, le paragraphe (27) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(30) If section 22 of the other Act comes into force before section 332 of this Act, then that section 332 is repealed.









(30) Si l’article 22 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 332 de la présente loi, cet article 332 est abrogé.














(31) If section 332 of this Act comes into force before section 22 of the other Act, then






(a) that section 22 is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed; and






(b) subsections 20(1) and (1.1) of the Trademarks Act are replaced by the following:









(31) Si l’article 332 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 22 de l’autre loi :






a) cet article 22 est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé;






b) les paragraphes 20(1) et (1.1) de la Loi sur les marques de commerce sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Infringement



20. (1) The right of the owner of a registered trademark to its exclusive use is deemed to be infringed by any person who is not entitled to its use under this Act and who








(a) sells, distributes or advertises any goods or services in association with a confusing trademark or trade name;








(b) manufactures, causes to be manufactured, possesses, imports, exports or attempts to export any goods in association with a confusing trademark or trade name, for the purpose of their sale or distribution;








(c) sells, offers for sale or distributes any label or packaging, in any form, bearing a trademark or trade name, if








(i) the person knows or ought to know that the label or packaging is intended to be associated with goods or services that are not those of the owner of the registered trademark, and








(ii) the sale, distribution or advertisement of the goods or services in association with the label or packaging would be a sale, distribution or advertisement in association with a confusing trademark or trade name; or








(d) manufactures, causes to be manufactured, possesses, imports, exports or attempts to export any label or packaging, in any form, bearing a trademark or trade name, for the purpose of its sale or distribution or for the purpose of the sale, distribution or advertisement of goods or services in association with it, if








(i) the person knows or ought to know that the label or packaging is intended to be associated with goods or services that are not those of the owner of the registered trademark, and








(ii) the sale, distribution or advertisement of the goods or services in association with the label or packaging would be a sale, distribution or advertisement in association with a confusing trademark or trade name.









20. (1) Le droit du propriétaire d’une marque de commerce déposée à l’emploi exclusif de cette dernière est réputé être violé par une personne qui est non admise à l’employer selon la présente loi et qui :



Violation




a) soit vend, distribue ou annonce des produits ou services en liaison avec une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial créant de la confusion;








b) soit fabrique, fait fabriquer, a en sa possession, importe, exporte ou tente d’exporter des produits, en vue de leur vente ou de leur distribution et en liaison avec une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial créant de la confusion;








c) soit vend, offre en vente ou distribue des étiquettes ou des emballages, quelle qu’en soit la forme, portant une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial alors que :








(i) d’une part, elle sait ou devrait savoir que les étiquettes ou les emballages sont destinés à être associés à des produits ou services qui ne sont pas ceux du propriétaire de la marque de commerce déposée,








(ii) d’autre part, la vente, la distribution ou l’annonce des produits ou services en liaison avec les étiquettes ou les emballages constituerait une vente, une distribution ou une annonce en liaison avec une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial créant de la confusion;








d) soit fabrique, fait fabriquer, a en sa possession, importe, exporte ou tente d’exporter des étiquettes ou des emballages, quelle qu’en soit la forme, portant une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial, en vue de leur vente ou de leur distribution ou en vue de la vente, de la distribution ou de l’annonce de produits ou services en liaison avec ceux-ci, alors que :








(i) d’une part, elle sait ou devrait savoir que les étiquettes ou les emballages sont destinés à être associés à des produits ou services qui ne sont pas ceux du propriétaire de la marque de commerce déposée,








(ii) d’autre part, la vente, la distribution ou l’annonce des produits ou services en liaison avec les étiquettes ou les emballages constituerait une vente, une distribution ou une annonce en liaison avec une marque de commerce ou un nom commercial créant de la confusion.














Exception — bona fide use



(1.1) The registration of a trademark does not prevent a person from making, in a manner that is not likely to have the effect of depreciating the value of the goodwill attaching to the trademark,








(a) any bona fide use of his or her personal name as a trade name; or








(b) any bona fide use, other than as a trademark, of the geographical name of his or her place of business or of any accurate description of the character or quality of his or her goods or services.









(1.1) L’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce n’a pas pour effet d’empêcher une personne d’employer les éléments ci-après de bonne foi et d’une manière non susceptible d’entraîner la diminution de la valeur de l’achalandage attaché à la marque de commerce :



Exception — emploi de bonne foi




a) son nom personnel comme nom commercial;








b) le nom géographique de son siège d’affaires ou toute description exacte du genre ou de la qualité de ses produits ou services, sauf si elle les emploie à titre de marque de commerce.














Exception — utilitarian feature



(1.2) The registration of a trademark does not prevent a person from using any utilitarian feature embodied in the trademark.









(1.2) L’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce n’a pas pour effet d’empêcher une personne d’utiliser toute caractéristique utilitaire incorporée dans la marque.



Exception —caractéristique utilitaire












(32) If section 332 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 22 of the other Act, then that section 22 is deemed to have come into force before that section 332 and subsection (30) applies as a consequence.









(32) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 332 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 22 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 22 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 332, le paragraphe (30) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(33) If section 333 of this Act comes into force before paragraph 55(b) of the other Act, then that paragraph 55(b) is repealed.









(33) Si l’article 333 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’alinéa 55b) de l’autre loi, cet alinéa 55b) est abrogé.














(34) If paragraph 55(b) of the other Act comes into force before section 333 of this Act, then that section 333 is repealed.









(34) Si l’alinéa 55b) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 333 de la présente loi, cet article 333 est abrogé.














(35) If section 333 of this Act comes into force on the same day as paragraph 55(b) of the other Act, then that paragraph 55(b) is deemed to have come into force before that section 333 and subsection (34) applies as a consequence.









(35) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 333 de la présente loi et celle de l’alinéa 55b) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet alinéa 55b) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 333, le paragraphe (34) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(36) If section 338 of this Act comes into force before section 28 of the other Act, then that section 28 is replaced by the following:









(36) Si l’article 338 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 28 de l’autre loi, cet article 28 est remplacé par ce qui suit :














28. Section 29 of the Act is replaced by the following:









28. L’article 29 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Available to public



29. (1) The following shall be made available to the public at the times and in the manner established by the Registrar:








(a) the register;








(b) all applications for the registration of a trademark, including those abandoned;








(c) the list of trademark agents;








(d) the list of geographical indications kept under subsection 11.12(1);








(e) all requests made under paragraph 9(1)(n); and








(f) all documents filed with the Registrar relating to a registered trademark, an application for the registration of a trademark, a request under paragraph 9(1)(n) and objection proceedings under section 11.13.









29. (1) Sont accessibles au public selon les modalités que le registraire fixe :



Accessibilité




a) le registre;








b) les demandes d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce, y compris celles qui sont abandonnées;








c) la liste des agents de marques de commerce;








d) la liste des indications géographiques tenue aux termes du paragraphe 11.12(1);








e) les demandes présentées au titre de l’alinéa 9(1)n);








f) les documents produits auprès du registraire relativement à une marque de commerce déposée, à une demande d’enregistrement de marque de commerce, à une demande présentée au titre de l’alinéa 9(1)n) et à une procédure d’opposition visée à l’article 11.13.














Certified copies



(2) The Registrar shall, on request and on payment of the prescribed fee, furnish a copy certified by the Registrar of any entry in the register or lists, or of any of those applications, requests or documents.









(2) Le registraire fournit, sur demande et sur paiement du droit prescrit à cet égard, une copie, certifiée par lui, de toute inscription faite dans le registre ou sur les listes, ou de l’un de ces documents ou demandes.



Copies certifiées










Destruction of records



29.1 Despite subsection 29(1), the Registrar may destroy








(a) an application for the registration of a trademark that is refused and any document relating to the application, at any time after six years after the day on which the application is refused or, if an appeal is taken, on which final judgment in the appeal upholding the refusal is given;








(b) an application for the registration of a trademark that is abandoned and any document relating to the application, at any time after six years after the day on which the application is abandoned;








(c) a document relating to an expunged registration of a trademark, at any time after six years after the day on which the registration is expunged;








(d) a request under paragraph 9(1)(n) and any document relating to it, at any time after six years after








(i) the day on which the request is abandoned,








(ii) the day on which the request is refused or, if an appeal is taken, on which final judgment in the appeal upholding the refusal is given, or








(iii) the day on which a court declares that the badge, crest, emblem or mark in question is invalid or, if an appeal is taken, on which final judgment in the appeal upholding the declaration is given;








(e) a document relating to objection proceedings under section 11.13 with respect to a geographical indication that is removed from the list of geographical indications under subsection 11.12(4), at any time after six years after the day on which it is removed; and








(f) a document relating to objection proceedings under section 11.13 with respect to which a decision is made that the indication is not a geographical indication, at any time after six years after the day on which the decision is made or, if an appeal is taken, on which final judgment in the appeal upholding the decision is given.









29.1 Malgré le paragraphe 29(1), le registraire peut détruire :



Destruction de documents




a) la demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce qui a été rejetée et tout document lié à celle-ci, six ans après la date du rejet ou, en cas d’appel, celle du jugement définitif confirmant le rejet;








b) la demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce qui a été abandonnée et tout document lié à celle-ci, six ans après la date de l’abandon;








c) tout document lié à un enregistrement radié d’une marque de commerce, six ans après la date de la radiation;








d) la demande présentée au titre de l’alinéa 9(1)n) et tout document lié à celle-ci, six ans après :








(i) la date de l’abandon de la demande,








(ii) la date du rejet de celle-ci ou, en cas d’appel, celle du jugement définitif confirmant le rejet,








(iii) la date où un tribunal déclare invalide l’insigne, l’écusson, la marque ou l’emblème ou, en cas d’appel, celle du jugement définitif confirmant l’invalidité;








e) tout document lié à une procédure d’opposition visée à l’article 11.13 portant sur une indication géographique qui a été supprimée de la liste des indications géographiques en vertu du paragraphe 11.12(4), six ans après la date de cette suppression;








f) tout document lié à une procédure d’opposition visée à l’article 11.13 qui résulte en une décision qu’une indication n’est pas une indication géographique, six ans après la date de cette décision ou, en cas d’appel, celle du jugement définitif confirmant cette décision.
















(37) If section 338 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 28 of the other Act, then that section 28 is deemed to have come into force before that section 338.









(37) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 338 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 28 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 28 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 338.














(38) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before subsection 29(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(1) is repealed.









(38) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 29(1) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 29(1) est abrogé.














(39) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 29(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(1) is deemed to have come into force before that section 339.









(39) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 29(1) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 29(1) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 339.














(40) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before subsection 29(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(2) is repealed.









(40) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 29(2) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 29(2) est abrogé.














(41) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 29(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(2) is deemed to have come into force before that section 339.









(41) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 29(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 29(2) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 339.














(42) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before subsection 29(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(3) is repealed.









(42) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 29(3) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 29(3) est abrogé.














(43) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 29(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(3) is deemed to have come into force before that section 339.









(43) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 29(3) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 29(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 339.














(44) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before subsection 29(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(4) is repealed.









(44) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 29(4) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 29(4) est abrogé.














(45) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 29(4) of the other Act, then that subsection 29(4) is deemed to have come into force before that section 339.









(45) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 29(4) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 29(4) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 339.














(46) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before section 30 of the other Act, then that section 30 is repealed.









(46) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 30 de l’autre loi, cet article 30 est abrogé.














(47) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 30 of the other Act, then that section 339 is deemed to have come into force before that section 30, and subsection (46) applies as a consequence.









(47) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 30 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 339 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 30, le paragraphe (46) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(48) If section 339 of this Act comes into force before section 31 of the other Act, then that section 31 is repealed.









(48) Si l’article 339 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 31 de l’autre loi, cet article 31 est abrogé.














(49) If section 339 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 31 of the other Act, then that section 31 is deemed to have come into force before that section 339.









(49) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 31 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 31 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 339.














(50) If subsection 340(3) of this Act comes into force before subsection 33(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 33(2) is repealed.









(50) Si le paragraphe 340(3) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 33(2) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 33(2) est abrogé.














(51) If subsection 33(2) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 340(3) of this Act, then that subsection 340(3) is replaced by the following:









(51) Si le paragraphe 33(2) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 340(3) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 340(3) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(3) Subsection 34(5) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) La version française du paragraphe 34(5) de la même loi est remplacée par ce qui suit :












Prolongation



(5) Le requérant ne peut demander la prolongation, au titre de l’article 47, de la période de six mois prévue à l’alinéa (1)a) qu’après l’expiration de celle-ci. Le registraire ne peut la prolonger que d’au plus sept jours.









(5) Le requérant ne peut demander la prolongation, au titre de l’article 47, de la période de six mois prévue à l’alinéa (1)a) qu’après l’expiration de celle-ci. Le registraire ne peut la prolonger que d’au plus sept jours.



Prolongation












(52) If subsection 340(3) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 33(2) of the other Act, than that subsection 340(3) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 33(2), and subsection (50) applies as a consequence.









(52) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 340(3) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 33(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 340(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 33(2), le paragraphe (50) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(53) If subsection 342(2) of this Act comes into force before section 34 of the other Act, then that section 34 is repealed.









(53) Si le paragraphe 342(2) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 34 de l’autre loi, cet article 34 est abrogé.














(54) If section 34 of the other Act comes into force before subsection 342(2) of this Act, then that subsection 342(2) is repealed.









(54) Si l’article 34 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 342(2) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 342(2) est abrogé.














(55) If subsection 342(2) of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 34 of the other Act, then that subsection 342(2) is deemed to have come into force before that section 34, and subsection (53) applies as a consequence.









(55) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 342(2) de la présente loi et celle de l’article 34 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 342(2) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 34, le paragraphe (53) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(56) If subsection 343(3) of this Act comes into force before section 35 of the other Act, then that section 35 is repealed.









(56) Si le paragraphe 343(3) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 35 de l’autre loi, cet article 35 est abrogé.














(57) If section 35 of the other Act comes into force before subsection 343(3) of this Act, then that subsection 343(3) is repealed.









(57) Si l’article 35 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 343(3) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 343(3) est abrogé.














(58) If subsection 343(3) of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 35 of the other Act, then that subsection 343(3) is deemed to have come into force before that section 35 and subsection (56) applies as a consequence.









(58) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 343(3) de la présente loi et celle de l’article 35 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 343(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 35, le paragraphe (56) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(59) If section 344 of this Act comes into force before section 36 of the other Act, then that section 36 is repealed.









(59) Si l’article 344 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 36 de l’autre loi, cet article 36 est abrogé.














(60) If section 36 of the other Act comes into force before section 344 of this Act, then that section 344 is replaced by the following:









(60) Si l’article 36 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 344 de la présente loi, cet article 344 est remplacé par ce qui suit :














344. Sections 39 and 39.1 of the Act are replaced by the following:









344. Les articles 39 et 39.1 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Divisional application



39. (1) After having filed an application for the registration of a trademark, an applicant may limit the original application to one or more of the goods or services that were within its scope and file a divisional application for the registration of the same trademark in association with any other goods or services that were








(a) within the scope of the original application on its filing date; and








(b) within the scope of the original application as advertised, if the divisional application is filed on or after the day on which the application is advertised under subsection 37(1).









39. (1) Après avoir produit la demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce, le requérant peut restreindre cette demande originale à l’un ou plusieurs des produits ou services visés par celle-ci et produire une demande divisionnaire pour l’enregistrement de la même marque de commerce en liaison avec d’autres produits ou services qui étaient visés par la demande originale à la date de sa production et, si la demande divisionnaire est produite le jour où la demande originale est annoncée en application du paragraphe 37(1) ou après ce jour, visés par celle-ci dans sa version annoncée.



Demande divisionnaire










Identification



(2) A divisional application shall indicate that it is a divisional application and shall, in the prescribed manner, identify the corresponding original application.









(2) La demande divisionnaire précise qu’il s’agit d’une demande divisionnaire et indique, de la façon prescrite, la demande originale correspondante.



Précisions










Separate application



(3) A divisional application is a separate application, including with respect to the payment of any fees.









(3) La demande divisionnaire constitue une demande distincte, notamment pour le paiement des droits.



Demande distincte










Filing date



(4) A divisional application’s filing date is deemed to be the original application’s filing date.









(4) La date de production de la demande divisionnaire est réputée être celle de la demande originale.



Date de la demande divisionnaire










Division of divisional application



(5) A divisional application may itself be divided under subsection (1), in which case this section applies as if that divisional application were an original application.









(5) La demande divisionnaire peut elle-même être divisée en vertu du paragraphe (1), auquel cas, le présent article s’applique au même titre que si cette demande était la demande originale.



Division d’une demande divisionnaire












(61) If section 344 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 36 of the other Act, then that section 344 is deemed to have come into force before that section 36 and subsection (59) applies as a consequence.









(61) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 344 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 36 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 344 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 36, le paragraphe (59) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(62) If section 345 of this Act comes into force before subsection 37(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(1) is repealed.









(62) Si l’article 345 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 37(1) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 37(1) est abrogé.














(63) If section 345 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 37(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(1) is deemed to have come into force before that section 345.









(63) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 37(1) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 37(1) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 345.














(64) If section 345 of this Act comes into force before subsection 37(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(2) is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed.









(64) Si l’article 345 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 37(2) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 37(2) est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé.














(65) If section 345 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 37(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(2) is deemed to have come into force before that section 345.









(65) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 37(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 37(2) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 345.














(66) If section 345 of this Act comes into force before subsection 37(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(3) is repealed.









(66) Si l’article 345 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 37(3) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 37(3) est abrogé.














(67) If section 345 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 37(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 37(3) is deemed to have come into force before that section 345.









(67) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 37(3) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 37(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 345.














(68) If subsection 346(1) of this Act comes into force before subsection 38(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 38(1) is repealed.









(68) Si le paragraphe 346(1) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 38(1) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 38(1) est abrogé.














(69) If subsection 346(1) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 38(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 38(1) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 346(1).









(69) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 346(1) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 38(1) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 38(1) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 346(1).














(70) If subsection 346(2) of this Act comes into force before subsection 38(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 38(2) is repealed.









(70) Si le paragraphe 346(2) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 38(2) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 38(2) est abrogé.














(71) If subsection 38(2) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 346(2) of this Act, then that subsection 346(2) is replaced by the following:









(71) Si le paragraphe 38(2) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 346(2) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 346(2) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(2) Paragraph 41(1)(f) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 41(1)f) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(f) subject to the regulations, merge registrations of the trademark that stem, under section 39, from the same original application.









f) sous réserve des règlements, la fusion de tout enregistrement de la marque de commerce découlant d’une même demande originale divisée sous le régime de l’article 39.














(72) If subsection 346(2) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 38(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 346(2) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 38(2) and subsection (70) applies as a consequence.









(72) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 346(2) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 38(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 346(2) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 38(2), le paragraphe (70) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(73) If subsection 346(3) of this Act comes into force before subsection 38(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 38(3) is repealed.









(73) Si le paragraphe 346(3) de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 38(3) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 38(3) est abrogé.














(74) If subsection 38(3) of the other Act comes into force before subsection 346(3) of this Act, then that subsection 346(3) is replaced by the following:









(74) Si le paragraphe 38(3) de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 346(3) de la présente loi, ce paragraphe 346(3) est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(3) Section 41 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):









(3) L’article 41 de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après le paragraphe (3), de ce qui suit :












Removal of registration



(4) The Registrar may, within three months after the registration of a trademark, remove the registration from the register if the Registrar registered the trademark without considering a previously filed request for an extension of time to file a statement of opposition.









(4) S’il a enregistré une marque de commerce sans tenir compte d’une demande de prolongation du délai préalablement déposée pour produire une déclaration d’opposition, le registraire peut, dans les trois mois qui suivent l’enregistrement, supprimer celui-ci du registre.



Suppression de l’enregistrement












(75) If subsection 346(3) of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 38(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 346(3) is deemed to have come into force before that subsection 38(3) and subsection (73) applies as a consequence.









(75) Si l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 346(3) de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 38(3) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 346(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant ce paragraphe 38(3), le paragraphe (73) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(76) If section 349 of this Act comes into force before section 39 of the other Act, then that section 39 is repealed.









(76) Si l’article 349 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 39 de l’autre loi, cet article 39 est abrogé.














(77) If section 349 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 39 of the other Act, then that section 39 is deemed to have come into force before that section 349.









(77) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 349 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 39 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 39 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 349.














(78) If section 352 of this Act comes into force before section 40 of the other Act, then that section 40 is repealed.









(78) Si l’article 352 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 40 de l’autre loi, cet article 40 est abrogé.














(79) If section 40 of the other Act comes into force before section 352 of this Act, then that section 352 is replaced by the following:









(79) Si l’article 40 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 352 de la présente loi, cet article 352 est remplacé par ce qui suit :














352. Subsections 48(3) and (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:









352. Les paragraphes 48(3) et (4) de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Transfer of application



(3) The Registrar shall, subject to the regulations, record the transfer of an application for the registration of a trademark on the request of the applicant or, on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar of the transfer, on the request of a transferee of the application.









(3) Sous réserve des règlements, le registraire inscrit le transfert de toute demande d’enregistrement d’une marque de commerce sur demande du requérant ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert qu’il juge satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire de la demande.



Inscription du transfert — demande d’enregistrement










Transfer of trademark



(4) The Registrar shall, subject to the regulations, register the transfer of any registered trademark on the request of the registered owner or, on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar of the transfer, on the request of a transferee of the trademark.









(4) Sous réserve des règlements, le registraire inscrit le transfert de toute marque de commerce déposée sur demande du propriétaire inscrit de la marque de commerce ou, à la réception d’une preuve du transfert qu’il juge satisfaisante, d’un cessionnaire de la marque.



Inscription du transfert — marque de commerce










Removal of recording or registration



(5) The Registrar shall remove the recording or the registration of the transfer referred to in subsection (3) or (4) on receipt of evidence satisfactory to the Registrar that the transfer should not have been recorded or registered.









(5) Le registraire supprime l’inscription du transfert visé aux paragraphes (3) ou (4) à la réception d’une preuve qu’il juge satisfaisante que le transfert n’aurait pas dû être inscrit.



Suppression de l’inscription du transfert












(80) If section 352 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 40 of the other Act, then that section 352 is deemed to have come into force before that section 40 and subsection (78) applies as a consequence.









(80) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 352 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 40 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 352 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 40, le paragraphe (78) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(81) If section 357 of this Act comes into force before subsection 50(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(1) is repealed.









(81) Si l’article 357 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 50(1) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 50(1) est abrogé.














(82) If section 357 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 50(1) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(1) is deemed to have come into force before that section 357.









(82) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 357 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 50(1) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 50(1) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 357.














(83) If section 357 of this Act comes into force before subsection 50(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(2) is repealed.









(83) Si l’article 357 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 50(2) de l’autre loi, le paragraphe 50(2) est abrogé.














(84) If section 357 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 50(2) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(2) is deemed to have come into force before that section 357.









(84) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 357 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 50(2) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 50(2) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 357.














(85) If section 357 of this Act comes into force before subsection 50(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(3) is repealed.









(85) Si l’article 357 de la présente loi entre en vigueur avant le paragraphe 50(3) de l’autre loi, ce paragraphe 50(3) est abrogé.














(86) If section 357 of this Act comes into force on the same day as subsection 50(3) of the other Act, then that subsection 50(3) is deemed to have come into force before that section 357.









(86) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 357 de la présente loi et celle du paragraphe 50(3) de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, ce paragraphe 50(3) est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 357.














(87) In subsections (88) to (98), “royal assent day” means the day on which this Act receives royal assent.









(87) Aux paragraphes (88) à (98), la « date de la sanction » s’entend de la date à laquelle la présente loi reçoit la sanction royale.














(88) If neither section 51 nor 52 of the other Act is in force on royal assent day, then






(a) those sections 51 and 52 are repealed;






(b) this Act is amended by adding the following after section 358:









(88) Si ni l’un ni l’autre des articles 51 et 52 de l’autre loi ne sont en vigueur à la date de la sanction :






a) ces articles 51 et 52 sont abrogés;






b) la présente loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 358, de ce qui suit :














358.1 Section 69 of the Act is replaced by the following:









358.1 L’article 69 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Disclosure of documents



69. The disclosure of documents — on which entries in the register to be kept under paragraph 26(1)(b), as it read immediately before the day on which subsection 27(1) of the Combating Counterfeit Products Act comes into force, are based — is subject to subsection 50(6), as it read on June 8, 1993.









69. La divulgation des documents sur lesquels s’appuient les inscriptions figurant dans le registre prévu à l’alinéa 26(1)b), dans sa version à la veille de l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 27(1) de la Loi visant à combattre la contrefaçon de produits, est régie par le paragraphe 50(6), dans sa version au 8 juin 1993.



Divulgation de documents












358.2 Section 69 of the Act is repealed.









358.2 L’article 69 de la même loi est abrogé.














358.3 The heading before section 69 of the Act is replaced by the following:









358.3 L’intertitre qui précède l’article 69 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS






(c) section 359 of this Act is replaced by the following:









DISPOSITIONS TRANSITOIRES






c) l’article 359 de la présente loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














359. The Act is amended by adding the following after section 69:









359. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 69, de ce qui suit :












Application not advertised



69.1 An application for registration in respect of which all of the items set out in subsection 33(1), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, have been received by the Registrar before the day on which that section 339 comes into force, and that has not been advertised under subsection 37(1) before that day shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act other than section 31, subsection 33(1) and section 34, as enacted or amended by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1; and








(b) section 34, as it read immediately before the day on which section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force.









69.1 La demande d’enregistrement à l’égard de laquelle le registraire a reçu, avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, tous les éléments énumérés au paragraphe 33(1), dans sa version édictée par cet article, et qui n’a pas été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant cette date est régie, à la fois :



Demande non annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception de l’article 31, du paragraphe 33(1) et de l’article 34, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014;








b) par l’article 34 de la présente loi, dans sa version antérieure à cette date.














Application advertised



70. (1) An application for registration that has been advertised under subsection 37(1) before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, other than subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (8) and sections 39 and 40; and








(b) the definition “Nice Classification” in section 2, subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (12), sections 39 and 40 and subsections 48(3) and (5), as enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









70. (1) La demande d’enregistrement qui a été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 342 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 est régie, à la fois :



Demande annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur version antérieure à cette date, à l’exception des paragraphes 6(2) à (4), des articles 28 et 36, des paragraphes 38(6) à (8) et des articles 39 et 40;








b) par la définition de « classification de Nice », à l’article 2, les paragraphes 6(2) à (4), les articles 28 et 36, les paragraphes 38(6) à (12), les articles 39 et 40 et les paragraphes 48(3) et (5), édictés par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.














Regulations



(2) For greater certainty, a regulation made under section 65, as enacted by section 357 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, applies to an application referred to in subsection (1), unless the regulation provides otherwise.









(2) Il est entendu que tout règlement pris en vertu de l’article 65, édicté par l’article 357 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, s’applique à la demande visée au paragraphe (1), sauf indication contraire prévue par ce règlement.



Règlements










Nice Classification



(3) Despite subsection (1), the Registrar may require an applicant to amend the statement of goods or services contained in an application referred to in subsection (1) so that the goods or services are grouped in the manner described in subsection 30(3), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Malgré le paragraphe (1), le registraire peut exiger du requérant la modification de l’état des produits ou services contenu dans la demande visée au paragraphe (1) pour rendre celui-ci conforme au paragraphe 30(3), édicté par l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Classification de Nice










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










Declaration of use



71. For greater certainty, an applicant is not required to submit a declaration of use referred to in subsection 40(2), as that subsection read immediately before the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in order for the Registrar to register the trademark and issue a certificate of registration.









71. Il est entendu que le requérant n’a pas à fournir la déclaration visée au paragraphe 40(2), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, pour que le registraire enregistre la marque de commerce et délivre un certificat de son enregistrement.



Déclaration d’emploi










Registered trademarks — applications filed before coming into force



72. Any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered on or after that day on the basis of an application filed before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accord-ance with the provisions of this Act.









72. Toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée à compter de cette date au titre d’une demande produite avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée —demande produite avant l’entrée en vigueur










Registered trademarks



73. (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4), any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act.









73. (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (4), toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée










Application of paragraph 26(2)(e.1)



(2) Paragraph 26(2)(e.1) does not apply to a trademark referred to in subsection (1) unless the register is amended under section 44.1.









(2) L’alinéa 26(2)e.1) ne s’applique pas aux marques de commerce visées au paragraphe (1), à moins que le registre ne soit modifié en vertu de l’article 44.1.



Application de l’alinéa 26(2)e.1)










Amending register



(3) The Registrar may amend the register kept under section 26 to reflect the amendments to this Act that are made by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Le registraire peut apporter des modifications au registre qu’il tient en application de l’article 26 afin de tenir compte des modifications apportées à la présente loi par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Modifications au registre










Subsection 46(1)



(4) Subsection 46(1), as it read immediately before the day on which section 350 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, continues to apply to a registration that is on the register on the day before the day on which that section comes into force until the registration is renewed.








(d) section 368 of this Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 46(1), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 350 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, continue de s’appliquer aux enregistrements qui figurent au registre la veille de l’entrée en vigueur de cet article, et ce, jusqu’à leur renouvellement.



Paragraphe 46(1)




d) l’article 368 de la présente loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














Order in council



368. (1) This Division, other than sections 358.1, 358.2 and 367, comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









368. (1) La présente section, à l’exception des articles 358.1, 358.2 et 367, entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret










Order in council



(2) Sections 358.1 and 358.2 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









(2) Les articles 358.1 et 358.2 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












(89) If section 51 of the other Act comes into force on royal assent day, and that day is before the day on which section 52 of the other Act comes into force, then that section 51 is deemed never to have come into force and subsection (88) applies as a consequence.









(89) Si l’article 51 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur à la date de la sanction, et que cette date précède celle à laquelle l’article 52 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur, cet article 51 est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur, le paragraphe (88) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(90) If section 52 of the other Act comes into force on royal assent day, and that day is before the day on which section 51 of the other Act comes into force, then that section 52 is deemed never to have come into force and subsection (88) applies as a consequence.









(90) Si l’article 52 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur à la date de la sanction, et que cette date précède celle à laquelle l’article 51 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur, cet article 52 est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur, le paragraphe (88) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(91) If section 51 of the other Act comes into force before section 52 of the other Act, and those sections are both in force before royal assent day, then section 359 of this Act is replaced by the following:









(91) Si l’article 51 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 52 de l’autre loi, et que ces articles sont tous deux en vigueur avant la date de la sanction, l’article 359 de la présente loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














359. Sections 70 to 72 of the Act are replaced by the following:









359. Les articles 70 à 72 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :












Application not advertised



69.1 An application for registration in respect of which all of the items set out in subsection 33(1), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, have been received by the Registrar before the day on which that section 339 comes into force, and that has not been advertised under subsection 37(1) before that day shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act other than section 31, subsection 33(1) and section 34, as enacted or amended by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1; and








(b) section 34, as it read immediately before the day on which section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force.









69.1 La demande d’enregistrement à l’égard de laquelle le registraire a reçu, avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, tous les éléments énumérés au paragraphe 33(1), dans sa version édictée par cet article, et qui n’a pas été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant cette date est régie, à la fois :



Demande non annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception de l’article 31, du paragraphe 33(1) et de l’article 34, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014;








b) par l’article 34 de la présente loi, dans sa version antérieure à cette date.














Application advertised



70. (1) An application for registration that has been advertised under subsection 37(1) before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, other than subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (8) and sections 39 and 40; and








(b) the definition “Nice Classification” in section 2, subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (12), sections 39 and 40 and subsections 48(3) and (5), as enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









70. (1) La demande d’enregistrement qui a été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 342 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 est régie, à la fois :



Demande annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur version antérieure à cette date, à l’exception des paragraphes 6(2) à (4), des articles 28 et 36, des paragraphes 38(6) à (8) et des articles 39 et 40;








b) par la définition de « classification de Nice », à l’article 2, les paragraphes 6(2) à (4), les articles 28 et 36, les paragraphes 38(6) à (12), les articles 39 et 40 et les paragraphes 48(3) et (5), édictés par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.














Regulations



(2) For greater certainty, a regulation made under section 65, as enacted by section 357 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, applies to an application referred to in subsection (1), unless the regulation provides otherwise.









(2) Il est entendu que tout règlement pris en vertu de l’article 65, édicté par l’article 357 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, s’applique à la demande visée au paragraphe (1), sauf indication contraire prévue par ce règlement.



Règlements










Nice Classification



(3) Despite subsection (1), the Registrar may require an applicant to amend the statement of goods or services contained in an application referred to in subsection (1) so that the goods or services are grouped in the manner described in subsection 30(3), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Malgré le paragraphe (1), le registraire peut exiger du requérant la modification de l’état des produits ou services contenu dans la demande visée au paragraphe (1) pour rendre celui-ci conforme au paragraphe 30(3), édicté par l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Classification de Nice










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










Declaration of use



71. For greater certainty, an applicant is not required to submit a declaration of use referred to in subsection 40(2), as that subsection read immediately before the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in order for the Registrar to register the trademark and issue a certificate of registration.









71. Il est entendu que le requérant n’a pas à fournir la déclaration visée au paragraphe 40(2), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, pour que le registraire enregistre la marque de commerce et délivre un certificat de son enregistrement.



Déclaration d’emploi










Registered trademarks — applications filed before coming into force



72. Any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered on or after that day on the basis of an application filed before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accord­ance with the provisions of this Act.









72. Toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée à compter de cette date au titre d’une demande produite avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée —demande produite avant l’entrée en vigueur










Registered trademarks



73. (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4), any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act.









73. (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (4), toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée










Application of paragraph 26(2)(e.1)



(2) Paragraph 26(2)(e.1) does not apply to a trademark referred to in subsection (1) unless the register is amended under section 44.1.









(2) L’alinéa 26(2)e.1) ne s’applique pas aux marques de commerce visées au paragraphe (1), à moins que le registre ne soit modifié en vertu de l’article 44.1.



Application de l’alinéa 26(2)e.1)










Amending register



(3) The Registrar may amend the register kept under section 26 to reflect the amendments to this Act that are made by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Le registraire peut apporter des modifications au registre qu’il tient en application de l’article 26 afin de tenir compte des modifications apportées à la présente loi par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Modifications au registre










Subsection 46(1)



(4) Subsection 46(1), as it read immediately before the day on which section 350 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, continues to apply to a registration that is on the register on the day before the day on which that section comes into force until the registration is renewed.









(4) Le paragraphe 46(1), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 350 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, continue de s’appliquer aux enregistrements qui figurent au registre la veille de l’entrée en vigueur de cet article, et ce, jusqu’à leur renouvellement.



Paragraphe 46(1)












(92) If sections 51 and 52 of the other Act come into force on the same day and that day is before royal assent day, then that section 51 is deemed to have come into force before that section 52, and subsection (91) applies as a consequence.









(92) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 51 de l’autre loi et celle de l’article 52 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, et que la date à laquelle ces articles entrent en vigueur précède la date de la sanction, cet article 51 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 52, le paragraphe (91) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(93) If section 52 of the other Act comes into force on royal assent day, and that day is after the day on which section 51 of the other Act has come into force, then that section 52 is deemed to have come into force before royal assent day and subsection (91) applies as a consequence.









(93) Si l’article 52 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur à la date de la sanction, et que cette date est postérieure à celle à laquelle l’article 51 de l’autre loi est entré en vigueur, cet article 52 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant la date de la sanction, le paragraphe (91) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(94) If section 52 of the other Act comes into force before section 51 of the other Act, and those sections are both in force before royal assent day, then






(a) that section 51 is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed; and






(b) this Act is amended by adding the following after section 358:









(94) Si l’article 52 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 51 de l’autre loi, et que ces articles sont tous deux en vigueur avant la date de la sanction :






a) cet article 51 est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé;






b) la présente loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 358, de ce qui suit :














358.1 The Act is amended by adding the following after the heading “TRANSITIONAL PROVISION” after section 68:









358.1 La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, après l’intertitre « DISPOSITION TRANSITOIRE » qui suit l’article 68, de ce qui suit :












Disclosure of documents



69. The disclosure of documents — on which entries in the register to be kept under paragraph 26(1)(b), as it read immediately before the day on which subsection 27(1) of the Combating Counterfeit Products Act comes into force, are based — is subject to subsection 50(6), as it read on June 8, 1993.









69. La divulgation des documents sur lesquels s’appuient les inscriptions figurant dans le registre prévu à l’alinéa 26(1)b), dans sa version à la veille de l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 27(1) de la Loi visant à combattre la contrefaçon de produits, est régie par le paragraphe 50(6), dans sa version au 8 juin 1993.



Divulgation de documents












358.2 Section 69 of the Act is repealed.









358.2 L’article 69 de la même loi est abrogé.














358.3 The heading after section 68 of the Act is replaced by the following:









358.3 L’intertitre qui suit l’article 68 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS






(c) section 359 of this Act is replaced by the following:









DISPOSITIONS TRANSITOIRES






c) l’article 359 de la présente loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














359. The Act is amended by adding the following in numerical order:









359. La même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre numérique, de ce qui suit :












Application not advertised



69.1 An application for registration in respect of which all of the items set out in subsection 33(1), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, have been received by the Registrar before the day on which that section 339 comes into force, and that has not been advertised under subsection 37(1) before that day shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act other than section 31, subsection 33(1) and section 34, as enacted or amended by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1; and








(b) section 34, as it read immediately before the day on which section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force.









69.1 La demande d’enregistrement à l’égard de laquelle le registraire a reçu, avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, tous les éléments énumérés au paragraphe 33(1), dans sa version édictée par cet article, et qui n’a pas été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant cette date est régie, à la fois :



Demande non annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, à l’exception de l’article 31, du paragraphe 33(1) et de l’article 34, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014;








b) par l’article 34 de la présente loi, dans sa version antérieure à cette date.














Application advertised



70. (1) An application for registration that has been advertised under subsection 37(1) before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, other than subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (8) and sections 39 and 40; and








(b) the definition “Nice Classification” in section 2, subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (12), sections 39 and 40 and subsections 48(3) and (5), as enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









70. (1) La demande d’enregistrement qui a été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 342 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 est régie, à la fois :



Demande annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur version antérieure à cette date, à l’exception des paragraphes 6(2) à (4), des articles 28 et 36, des paragraphes 38(6) à (8) et des articles 39 et 40;








b) par la définition de « classification de Nice », à l’article 2, les paragraphes 6(2) à (4), les articles 28 et 36, les paragraphes 38(6) à (12), les articles 39 et 40 et les paragraphes 48(3) et (5), édictés par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.














Regulations



(2) For greater certainty, a regulation made under section 65, as enacted by section 357 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1, applies to an application referred to in subsection (1), unless the regulation provides otherwise.









(2) Il est entendu que tout règlement pris en vertu de l’article 65, édicté par l’article 357 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, s’applique à la demande visée au paragraphe (1), sauf indication contraire prévue par ce règlement.



Règlements










Nice Classification



(3) Despite subsection (1), the Registrar may require an applicant to amend the statement of goods or services contained in an application referred to in subsection (1) so that the goods or services are grouped in the manner described in subsection 30(3), as enacted by section 339 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Malgré le paragraphe (1), le registraire peut exiger du requérant la modification de l’état des produits ou services contenu dans la demande visée au paragraphe (1) pour rendre celui-ci conforme au paragraphe 30(3), édicté par l’article 339 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Classification de Nice










Disagreement



(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services are to be grouped shall be determined by the Registrar, whose determination is not subject to appeal.









(4) Toute question soulevée à propos de la classe dans laquelle un produit ou un service doit être groupé est tranchée par le registraire, dont la décision est sans appel.



Désaccord










Declaration of use



71. For greater certainty, an applicant is not required to submit a declaration of use referred to in subsection 40(2), as that subsection read immediately before the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in order for the Registrar to register the trademark and issue a certificate of registration.









71. Il est entendu que le requérant n’a pas à fournir la déclaration visée au paragraphe 40(2), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, pour que le registraire enregistre la marque de commerce et délivre un certificat de son enregistrement.



Déclaration d’emploi










Registered trademarks — applications filed before coming into force



72. Any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered on or after that day on the basis of an application filed before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accord­ance with the provisions of this Act.









72. Toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée à compter de cette date au titre d’une demande produite avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée —demande produite avant l’entrée en vigueur










Registered trademarks



73. (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4), any matter arising on or after the day on which section 345 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, in respect of a trademark registered before that day, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act.









73. (1) Sous réserve des paragraphes (2) à (4), toute question soulevée à compter de la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 345 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 relativement à une marque de commerce enregistrée avant cette date est régie par les dispositions de la présente loi.



Marque de commerce enregistrée










Application of paragraph 26(2)(e.1)



(2) Paragraph 26(2)(e.1) does not apply to a trademark referred to in subsection (1) unless the register is amended under section 44.1.









(2) L’alinéa 26(2)e.1) ne s’applique pas aux marques de commerce visées au paragraphe (1), à moins que le registre ne soit modifié en vertu de l’article 44.1.



Application de l’alinéa 26(2)e.1)










Amending register



(3) The Registrar may amend the register kept under section 26 to reflect the amendments to this Act that are made by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









(3) Le registraire peut apporter des modifications au registre qu’il tient en application de l’article 26 afin de tenir compte des modifications apportées à la présente loi par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.



Modifications au registre










Subsection 46(1)



(4) Subsection 46(1), as it read immediately before the day on which section 350 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, continues to apply to a registration that is on the register on the day before the day on which that section comes into force until the registration is renewed.








(d) section 368 of this Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Le paragraphe 46(1), dans sa version antérieure à la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 350 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014, continue de s’appliquer aux enregistrements qui figurent au registre la veille de l’entrée en vigueur de cet article, et ce, jusqu’à leur renouvellement.



Paragraphe 46(1)




d) l’article 368 de la présente loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














Order in council



368. (1) This Division, other than sections 358.1, 358.2 and 367, comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









368. (1) La présente section, à l’exception des articles 358.1, 358.2 et 367, entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret










Order in council



(2) Sections 358.1 and 358.2 come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









(2) Les articles 358.1 et 358.2 entrent en vigueur à la date ou aux dates fixées par décret.



Décret












(95) If section 51 of the other Act comes into force on royal assent day, and that day is after the day on which section 52 of the other Act has come into force, then






(a) that section 51 is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed; and






(b) this Act is amended in the manner set out in paragraphs (94)(b) to (d).









(95) Si l’article 51 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur à la date de la sanction, et que cette date est postérieure à la date à laquelle l’article 52 de l’autre loi est entré en vigueur :






a) cet article 51 est réputé ne pas être entré en vigueur et est abrogé;






b) la présente loi est modifiée de la façon prévue aux alinéas (94)b) à d).














(96) If section 51 of the other Act comes into force before royal assent day, and section 52 of the other Act is not in force on royal assent day, then section 359 of this Act is replaced by the section 359 set out in subsection (91).









(96) Si l’article 51 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant la date de la sanction, et que l’article 52 de l’autre loi n’est pas en vigueur à la date de la sanction, l’article 359 de la présente loi est remplacé par l’article 359 qui se trouve au paragraphe (91).














(97) If section 52 of the other Act comes into force before royal assent day, and section 51 of the other Act is not in force on royal assent day, then






(a) that section 51 is repealed; and






(b) this Act is amended in the manner set out in paragraphs (94)(b) to (d).









(97) Si l’article 52 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant la date de la sanction, et que l’article 51 de l’autre loi n’est pas en vigueur à la date de la sanction :






a) cet article 51 est abrogé;






b) la présente loi est modifiée de la façon prévue aux alinéas (94)b) à d).














(98) If both sections 51 and 52 of the other Act come into force on royal assent day, then that section 51 is deemed to have come into force before that section 52, and that section 52 is deemed to have come into force before royal assent day, and subsection (91) applies as a consequence.









(98) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 51 de l’autre loi et celle de l’article 52 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, et que ces articles entrent en vigueur à la date de la sanction, cet article 51 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 52 et cet article 52 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant la date de la sanction, le paragraphe (91) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(99) On the first day on which both section 359 of this Act and section 28 of the other Act are in force, subsection 70(1) of the Trademarks Act is replaced by the following:









(99) Dès le premier jour où l’article 359 de la présente loi et l’article 28 de l’autre loi sont tous deux en vigueur, le paragraphe 70(1) de la Loi sur les marques de commerce est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Application advertised



70. (1) An application for registration that has been advertised under subsection 37(1) before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with








(a) the provisions of this Act as they read immediately before the day on which section 342 of the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1 comes into force, other than subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28, 29 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (8) and sections 39 and 40; and








(b) the definition “Nice Classification” in section 2, subsections 6(2) to (4), sections 28 to 29.1 and 36, subsections 38(6) to (12), sections 39 and 40 and subsections 48(3) and (5), as enacted by the Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1.









70. (1) La demande d’enregistrement qui a été annoncée, au titre du paragraphe 37(1), avant la date d’entrée en vigueur de l’article 342 de la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014 est régie, à la fois :



Demande annoncée




a) par les dispositions de la présente loi, dans leur version antérieure à cette date, à l’exception des paragraphes 6(2) à (4), des articles 28, 29 et 36, des paragraphes 38(6) à (8) et des articles 39 et 40;








b) par la définition de « classification de Nice », à l’article 2, les paragraphes 6(2) à (4), les articles 28 à 29.1 et 36, les paragraphes 38(6) à (12), les articles 39 et 40 et les paragraphes 48(3) et (5), édictés par la Loi no 1 sur le plan d’action économique de 2014.
















(100) If section 56 of the other Act comes into force before section 363 of this Act, then that section 363 is repealed.









(100) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 56 de l’autre loi précède celle de l’article 363 de la présente loi, cet article 363 est abrogé.














(101) If section 363 of this Act comes into force before section 56 of the other Act, then that section 56 is repealed.









(101) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 363 de la présente loi précède celle de l’article 56 de l’autre loi, cet article 56 est abrogé.














(102) If section 363 of this Act comes into force on the same day as section 56 of the other Act, then that section 56 is deemed to have come into force before that section 363 and subsection (100) applies as a consequence.









(102) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 363 de la présente loi et celle de l’article 56 de l’autre loi sont concomitantes, cet article 56 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 363, le paragraphe (100) s’appliquant en conséquence.














(103) If section 317 of this Act comes into force before any of the following provisions of the other Act, then any of the following provisions of the other Act that are not in force are repealed:






(a) section 8;






(b) section 9;






(c) section 12;






(d) section 13;






(e) subsection 15(1);






(f) subsection 15(3);






(g) subsection 24(1);






(h) subsection 24(2);






(i) section 32;






(j) subsection 33(1);






(k) section 41;






(l) section 47;






(m) section 49.









(103) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 317 de la présente loi précède celle de l’une ou de plusieurs des dispositions ci-après de l’autre loi, celles de ces dispositions de l’autre loi qui ne sont pas en vigueur sont abrogées :






a) l’article 8;






b) l’article 9;






c) l’article 12;






d) l’article 13;






e) le paragraphe 15(1);






f) le paragraphe 15(3);






g) le paragraphe 24(1);






h) le paragraphe 24(2);






i) l’article 32;






j) le paragraphe 33(1);






k) l’article 41;






l) l’article 47;






m) l’article 49.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



368. This Division, other than section 367, comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









368. La présente section, à l’exception de l’article 367, entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret












Division 26









Section 26










R.S., c. T-13



Reduction of Governor in Council Appointments









Mesure de réduction des postes pourvus par le gouverneur en conseil



L.R., ch. T-13












369. The definition “Registrar” in section 2 of the Trade-marks Act is replaced by the following:









369. La définition de « registraire », à l’article 2 de la Loi sur les marques de commerce, est remplacée par ce qui suit :












“Registrar”« registraire »



“Registrar” means the Registrar of Trade-marks who is described in subsection 63(1);









« registraire » Le titulaire du poste de registraire des marques de commerce institué par le paragraphe 63(1).



« registraire »“Registrar”










1995, c. 1, s. 62(2)



370. Subsection 63(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









370. Le paragraphe 63(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1995, ch. 1, par. 62(2)










Registrar



63. (1) There shall be a Registrar of Trade-marks, who shall be the Commissioner of Patents appointed under subsection 4(1) of the Patent Act. The Registrar shall be responsible to the Deputy Minister of Industry.









63. (1) Est institué le poste de registraire des marques de commerce, dont le titulaire est le commissaire aux brevets nommé en vertu du paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur les brevets; le registraire est responsable envers le sous-ministre de l’Industrie.



Registraire












Division 27









Section 27










R.S., c. O-9



Old Age Security Act









Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse



L.R., ch. O-9










Amendments to the Act









Modification de la loi












1996, c. 18, s. 51(1); 2007, c. 11, s. 16(2)



371. (1) Paragraph 11(7)(e) of the Old Age Security Act is replaced by the following:









371. (1) L’alinéa 11(7)e) de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1996, ch. 18, par. 51(1); 2007, ch. 11, par. 16(2)












(e) any month during which the pensioner is a person in respect of whom an undertaking by a sponsor is in effect as provided under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act.









e) tout mois pendant lequel le pensionné est une personne à l’égard de laquelle un répondant est lié par un engagement en cours de validité pris sous le régime de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés.












1996, c. 18, s. 51(2)



(2) Subsection 11(8) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 11(8) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1996, ch. 18, par. 51(2)










Application of paragraph (7)(e)



(8) Paragraph (7)(e) does not apply








(a) to a person who was qualified to receive a pension or an allowance immediately before the day on which this paragraph comes into force, whether or not they had applied for it; or








(b) to a pensioner if an event as provided by the regulations has occurred.









(8) L’alinéa (7)e) ne s’applique pas :



Application de l'alinéa (7)e)




a) à la personne qui était admissible à la pension ou à l’allocation à l’entrée en vigueur du présent alinéa, qu’elle ait ou non présenté une demande pour cette prestation;








b) au pensionné si un événement prévu par règlement s’est produit.














1996, c. 18, s. 53(1); 2000, c. 12, par. 207(1)(f); 2007, c. 11, s. 19(3)



372. (1) Paragraph 19(6)(d) of the Act is replaced by the following:









372. (1) L’alinéa 19(6)d) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1996, ch. 18, par. 53(1); 2000, ch. 12, al. 207(1)f); 2007, ch. 11, par. 19(3)












(d) any month during which the spouse or common-law partner is a person in respect of whom an undertaking by a sponsor is in effect as provided under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act;









d) tout mois pendant lequel l’époux ou conjoint de fait est une personne à l’égard de laquelle un répondant est lié par un engagement en cours de validité pris sous le régime de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés;












1996, c. 18,
s. 53(2);
2000, c. 12,
par.
207(1)(f)



(2) Subsection 19(6.2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 19(6.2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1996, ch.18, par. 53(2); 2000, ch. 12, al. 207(1)f)










Application
of paragraph
(6)(d)



(6.2) Paragraph (6)(d) does not apply to a spouse or common-law partner








(a) who was qualified to receive an allowance immediately before the day on which this paragraph comes into force, whether or not they had applied for it; or








(b) if an event as provided by the regulations has occurred.









(6.2) L’alinéa (6)d) ne s’applique pas à l’époux ou conjoint de fait dans les cas suivants :



Application de l'alinéa (6)d)




a) il était admissible à l’allocation à l’entrée en vigueur du présent alinéa, qu’il ait ou non présenté une demande pour cette prestation;








b) un événement prévu par règlement s’est produit.














1998, c. 21, s. 115(2); 2000, c. 12, par. 208(1)(d); 2007, c. 11, s. 20(3)



373. (1) Paragraph 21(9)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









373. (1) L’alinéa 21(9)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 21, par. 115(2); 2000, ch. 12, al. 208(1)d); 2007, ch. 11, par. 20(3)












(c) any month during which the survivor is a person in respect of whom an undertaking by a sponsor is in effect as provided under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act; or









c) tout mois pendant lequel le survivant est une personne à l’égard de laquelle un répondant est lié par un engagement en cours de validité pris sous le régime de la Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés;












1998, c. 21,
s. 115(3);
2000, c. 12,
par.
208(1)(d)



(2) Subsection 21(9.1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 21(9.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch.21, par. 115(3); 2000, ch. 12, al. 208(1)d)










Application
of paragraph
(9)(c)



(9.1) Paragraph (9)(c) does not apply to a survivor








(a) who was qualified to receive an allowance immediately before the day on which this paragraph comes into force, whether or not they had applied for it; or








(b) if an event as provided by the regulations has occurred.









(9.1) L’alinéa (9)c) ne s’applique pas au survivant dans les cas suivants :



Application de l'alinéa (9)c)




a) il était admissible à l’allocation à l’entrée en vigueur du présent alinéa, qu’il ait ou non présenté une demande pour cette prestation;








b) un événement prévu par règlement s’est produit.














Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



374. This Division comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









374. La présente section entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret












Division 28









Section 28












New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act









Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent












Enactment



375. The New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act is enacted as follows:









375. Est édictée la Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent, dont le texte suit :



Édiction de la loi












An Act respecting a new bridge in Montreal to replace the Champlain Bridge and the Nuns’ Island Bridge.









Loi visant un nouveau pont à Montréal pour remplacer le pont Champlain et le pont de l’Île des Soeurs












SHORT TITLE









TITRE ABRÉGÉ












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the New Bridge for the St. Lawrence Act.









1. Loi visant le nouveau pont pour le Saint-Laurent.



Titre abrégé










INTERPRETATION









DÉFINITIONS












Definitions



2. The following definitions apply in this Act.




“bridge”« pont »



“bridge” means a structure that spans the St. Lawrence River and connects the Island of Montreal to the City of Brossard, and includes








(a) a bridge that replaces the existing Champlain Bridge and connects Nuns’ Island to the City of Brossard;








(b) a bridge that replaces the existing Nuns’ Island Bridge and connects Montreal Island to Nuns’ Island; and








(c) the approaches to both bridges.




“construction”« construction »



“construction” in relation to the bridge or a related work, includes demolition of existing structures and any other work or activity related to its construction.




“Minister”« ministre »



“Minister” means the member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada designated under section 3.




“operation”« exploitation »



“operation”, in relation to the bridge or a related work, includes its maintenance and repair.




“person”« personne »



“person” means an individual, corporation, partnership or joint venture.




“related work”« ouvrage connexe »



“related work” means any of the following:








(a) any work that is useful to the operation of the bridge, including a toll facility;








(b) any work that is accessory to the bridge or to any work referred to in paragraph (a), including any portion of Highway 15 situated between the approach to the Nuns’ Island Bridge and the Atwater interchange that is reconstructed and widened.









2. Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente loi.



Définitions




« construction » S’agissant du pont ou d’un ouvrage connexe, sont assimilés à la construction la démolition des structures existantes ainsi que tous les travaux et activités connexes aux fins de la construction du pont ou de l’ouvrage connexe.



« construction »“construction”




« exploitation » S’agissant du pont ou d’un ouvrage connexe, sont assimilés à l’exploitation son entretien et sa réparation.



« exploitation »“operation”




« ministre » Le membre du Conseil privé de la Reine pour le Canada désigné en vertu de l’article 3.



« ministre »“Minister”




« ouvrage connexe »



« ouvrage connexe »“related work”




a) Ouvrage utile à l’exploitation du pont, y compris une installation de péage;








b) ouvrage accessoire au pont ou à l’un des ouvrages visés à l’alinéa a), y compris la portion reconstruite et élargie de l’autoroute 15 située entre l’approche du pont de l’Île des Soeurs et l’échangeur Atwater.








« personne » Personne physique ou morale. Y sont assimilées la société de personnes et la coentreprise.



« personne »“person”




« pont » Structure permettant de franchir le fleuve Saint-Laurent et reliant l’Île de Montréal et la Ville de Brossard, y compris :



« pont »“bridge”




a) le pont remplaçant le pont Champlain actuel et reliant l’Île des Soeurs à la Ville de Brossard;








b) le pont remplaçant le pont de l’Île des Soeurs actuel et reliant l’Île de Montréal à l’Île des Soeurs;








c) les approches des deux ponts.














DESIGNATION









DÉSIGNATION












Power to designate Minister



3. The Governor in Council may designate a member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada to be the Minister for the purposes of this Act.









3. Le gouverneur en conseil peut désigner tout membre du Conseil privé de la Reine pour le Canada à titre de ministre pour l’application de la présente loi.



Désignation du ministre










APPLICATION









APPLICATION












Role of Minister



4. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Minister is responsible for the administration of this Act, and the Minister’s powers, duties and functions include all matters relating to the bridge and related works.









4. Sauf disposition contraire de la présente loi, le ministre est responsable de l’application de la présente loi; les attributions du ministre incluent toute question qui concerne le pont et les ouvrages connexes.



Rôle du ministre










Declaration



5. The bridge and related works are declared to be works for the general advantage of Canada.









5. Le pont et les ouvrages connexes sont déclarés être à l’avantage général du Canada.



Déclaration










Exemption — Bridges Act



6. (1) The Bridges Act does not apply to the bridge and related works.









6. (1) La Loi sur les ponts ne s’applique pas au pont et à ses ouvrages connexes.



Exemption — Loi sur les ponts










Exemption — User Fees Act



(2) The User Fees Act does not apply in respect of the tolls, fees and other charges fixed by regulations made under paragraph 12(b).









(2) La Loi sur les frais d’utilisation ne s’applique pas aux droits fixés par règlement pris en vertu de l’alinéa 12b).



Exemption — Loi sur les frais d’utilisation










AGREEMENTS









ENTENTES












Minister of Public Works and Government Services



7. (1) The Minister of Public Works and Government Services may enter into an agreement with any person for any purpose relating to the design, construction or operation of the bridge or any related work, including an agreement respecting the collection of tolls, fees or other charges that may be imposed under this Act.









7. (1) Le ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux peut conclure avec toute personne une entente à toute fin liée à la conception, à la construction ou à l’exploitation du pont ou d’un ouvrage connexe, notamment une entente relative aux droits qui peuvent être imposés en vertu de la présente loi.



Ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux










Authority to carry out agreement



(2) The Minister of Public Works and Government Services may take any measures that he or she considers appropriate to carry out the agreement or to protect the interests or enforce the rights of Her Majesty in right of Canada under the agreement, including accepting and holding on behalf of Her Majesty any security granted under the agreement or releasing or realizing on that security.









(2) Le ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux peut employer les moyens qu’il juge utiles à la mise en oeuvre de l’entente et à la protection des intérêts de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada, ou au respect des droits de celle-ci, dans le cadre de l’entente. Il peut notamment, à cet égard, détenir, au nom de Sa Majesté, les sûretés consenties à celle-ci au titre de l’entente et les remettre ou les réaliser.



Pouvoirs de mise en oeuvre










Not agent of Her Majesty



(3) A person who enters into an agreement with the Minister of Public Works and Government Services under this section is not an agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada.









(3) La personne qui conclut une entente avec le ministre des Travaux publics et des Services gouvernementaux en vertu du présent article n’est pas mandataire de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada.



Non-mandataire










Implementation



8. The Minister may enter into any agreement that relates to the bridge or related work, or that is necessary for the implementation of an agreement entered into under section 7, with any person or with the government of the Province of Quebec or any municipality of that Province or any of their agencies or mandataries.









8. Le ministre peut conclure une entente relative au pont ou aux ouvrages connexes ou nécessaire à la mise en oeuvre des ententes conclues en vertu de l’article 7, avec toute personne ou avec le gouvernement de la province de Québec, une municipalité de cette province ou l’un de ses organismes ou mandataires.



Ministre










TOLLS, FEES OR OTHER CHARGES









DROITS












Payment



9. Any owner of a vehicle using the bridge must pay any toll, fee or other charge that is applicable to the vehicle under this Act.









9. Le propriétaire d’un véhicule empruntant le pont doit payer les droits imposés sur le véhicule en vertu de la présente loi.



Paiement










Charges recoverable



10. A toll, fee or other charge charged under this Act constitutes a debt owing to Her Majesty in right of Canada, and the amount of that debt is recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction.









10. Les droits exigibles aux termes de la présente loi constituent une créance de Sa Majesté du chef du Canada; leur recouvrement peut être poursuivi devant tout tribunal compétent.



Droits recouvrables










ORDER IN COUNCIL









DÉCRET












Other exemptions



11. (1) The Governor in Council may, by order, exempt any person, on any condition that the Governor in Council considers to be in the public interest, from any requirement under any federal Act to obtain a permit, licence, approval or other authorization in relation to the construction of the bridge or any related work.









11. (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par décret, exempter toute personne, aux conditions qu’il estime être dans l’intérêt public, de l’obligation d’obtenir, au titre de toute loi fédérale, une autorisation, notamment un permis, une licence ou un agrément, à l’égard de la construction du pont ou d’un ouvrage connexe.



Autres exemptions










Exemption from Statutory Instruments Act



(2) The Statutory Instruments Act does not apply to the order. However, the order must be published in the Canada Gazette.









(2) La Loi sur les textes réglementaires ne s’applique pas au décret. Toutefois, le décret doit être publié dans la Gazette du Canada.



Non-application de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires










Authorizations deemed issued



(3) After completion of the construction of the bridge or the related work, as the case may be, any authorization that would have been required in relation to its construction but for an exemption granted under subsection (1) is deemed to have been issued for the purpose of the application of the federal Act for which the exemption was granted.









(3) Une fois le pont ou l’ouvrage connexe construit, toute autorisation qui, n’eût été l’exemption visée au paragraphe (1), aurait été requise dans le cadre de sa construction, est réputée avoir été délivrée pour l’application de la loi fédérale pour laquelle l’exemption a été accordée.



Fiction juridique : autorisation










REGULATIONS









RÈGLEMENTS












Ministerial regulations



12. The Minister may make regulations








(a) designating the contravention of any provision of this Act as an offence punishable on summary conviction and fixing the maximum fine payable for each offence; and








(b) fixing any tolls, fees or other charges to be charged with respect to vehicles, or categories of vehicles, using the bridge.









12. Le ministre peut prendre des règlements pour :



Règlements ministériels




a) désigner comme infraction punissable sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire toute contravention à l’une des dispositions de la présente loi et fixer le montant maximal de l’amende pour chaque infraction;








b) fixer les droits à imposer à l’égard des véhicules ou catégories de véhicules empruntant le pont.
















Division 29









Section 29












Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act









Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs












Enactment of Act









Édiction de la loi












Enactment



376. The Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act whose text is as follows and whose schedule is set out in Schedule 6 to this Act, is enacted:









376. Est édictée la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs, dont le texte suit et dont l’annexe figure à l’annexe 6 de la présente loi :



Édiction












An Act to establish the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada









Loi portant création du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs












SHORT TITLE









TITRE ABRÉGÉ












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act.









1. Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs.



Titre abrégé










INTERPRETATION









DÉFINITIONS












Definitions



2. The following definitions apply in this Act.




“administrative tribunal”« tribunal administratif »



“administrative tribunal” means a body referred to in the schedule to this Act.




“Chief Administrator”« administrateur en chef »



“Chief Administrator” means the person appointed under subsection 5(1).




“Minister”« ministre »



“Minister” means the Minister of Justice.




“Service”« Service »



“Service” means the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada established by section 3.









2. Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente loi.



Définitions




« administrateur en chef » L’administrateur en chef du Service, nommé au titre du paragraphe 5(1).



« administrateur en chef »“Chief Administrator”




« ministre » Le ministre de la Justice.



« ministre »“Minister”




« Service » Le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs constitué par l’article 3.



« Service »“Service”




« tribunal administratif » Tout organisme énuméré à l’annexe.



« tribunal administratif »“administrative tribunal”










ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS SUPPORT SERVICE OF CANADA









SERVICE CANADIEN D’APPUI AUX TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS












Establishment of Service



3. The Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada, consisting of the Chief Administrator and employees of the Service, is established as a portion of the federal public administration.









3. Est constitué un secteur de l’administration publique fédérale, le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs, composé de l’administrateur en chef et de son personnel.



Constitution










Principal office



4. (1) The principal office of the Service is to be in the National Capital Region described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.









4. (1) Le siège du Service est fixé dans la région de la capitale nationale, délimitée à l’annexe de la Loi sur la capitale nationale.



Siège










Other offices



(2) The Chief Administrator may establish other offices of the Service elsewhere in Canada.









(2) L’administrateur en chef peut établir des bureaux du Service ailleurs au Canada.



Bureaux










CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR









ADMINISTRATEUR EN CHEF












Appointment



5. (1) The Chief Administrator is to be appointed by the Governor in Council to hold office during pleasure for a term of up to five years.









5. (1) Est créé le poste d’administrateur en chef du Service, dont le titulaire est nommé à titre amovible par le gouverneur en conseil pour une durée maximale de cinq ans.



Nomination










Re-appointment



(2) The Chief Administrator is eligible for re-appointment at the end of each term of office.









(2) Son mandat est renouvelable.



Renouvellement










Status of Chief Administrator



6. The Chief Administrator has the rank and status of a deputy head of a department.









6. L’administrateur en chef a rang et statut d’administrateur général de ministère.



Rang










Absence or incapacity



7. (1) If the Chief Administrator is absent or incapacitated or the office of Chief Administrator is vacant, the Minister must appoint another person to act as Chief Administrator, but a person must not be so appointed for a term of more than 90 days without the approval of the Governor in Council.









7. (1) En cas d’absence ou d’empêchement de l’administrateur en chef ou de vacance de son poste, le ministre nomme un administrateur en chef intérimaire; l’intérim ne peut cependant dépasser quatre-vingt-dix jours sans l’approbation du gouverneur en conseil.



Absence ou empêchement










Powers, duties and functions



(2) The person acting as Chief Administrator has all of the powers, duties and functions of the Chief Administrator conferred under this Act or any other Act of Parliament.









(2) L’administrateur en chef intérimaire exerce les attributions conférées à l’administrateur en chef sous le régime de la présente loi ou de toute autre loi fédérale.



Attributions










Salary and expenses



8. (1) The Chief Administrator is to be paid the remuneration that may be fixed by the Governor in Council and is entitled to be paid reasonable travel and living expenses incurred in the exercise of his or her powers or the performance of his or her duties and functions while absent from the Chief Administrator’s ordinary place of work.









8. (1) L’administrateur en chef reçoit le traitement fixé par le gouverneur en conseil et a droit aux frais de déplacement et de séjour entraînés par l’exercice, hors de son lieu habituel de travail, de ses attributions.



Traitement et frais










Compensation



(2) The Chief Administrator is deemed to be a person employed in the public service for the purposes of the Public Service Superannuation Act and to be employed in the federal public administration for the purposes of the Government Employees Compensation Act and any regulations made under section 9 of the Aeronautics Act.









(2) L’administrateur en chef est réputé appartenir à la fonction publique pour l’application de la Loi sur la pension de la fonction publique, être un agent de l’État pour l’application de la Loi sur l’indemnisation des agents de l’État et appartenir à l’administration publique fédérale pour l’application des règlements pris en vertu de l’article 9 de la Loi sur l’aéronautique.



Indemnisation










Chief executive officer



9. The Chief Administrator is the chief executive officer of the Service and has the control and management of the Service and all matters connected with it.









9. L’administrateur en chef est le premier dirigeant du Service. Il est chargé de la gestion du Service et de tout ce qui s’y rattache.



Premier dirigeant










Responsibility



10. The Chief Administrator is responsible for the provision of the support services and the facilities that are needed by each of the administrative tribunals to exercise its powers and perform its duties and functions in accord-ance with the rules that apply to its work.









10. L’administrateur en chef est chargé de fournir à chaque tribunal administratif les services d’appui et installations dont il a besoin pour exercer ses attributions en conformité avec les règles régissant ses activités.



Fonctions










General powers



11. (1) The Chief Administrator has all the powers that are necessary to perform his or her duties and functions under this or any other Act of Parliament.









11. (1) L’administrateur en chef a tous les pouvoirs nécessaires à l’exercice des fonctions qui lui sont conférées sous le régime de la présente loi ou de toute autre loi fédérale.



Pouvoirs généraux










Contracts, etc.



(2) The Chief Administrator may enter into contracts, memoranda of understanding or other arrangements, including contracts to engage the services of legal counsel or other persons having professional, technical or specialized knowledge to advise or assist an administrative tribunal or any of its members.









(2) Il peut conclure des contrats, ententes ou autres arrangements, notamment des contrats pour retenir les services de conseillers juridiques ou autres experts afin d’aider ou de conseiller un tribunal administratif ou l’un de ses membres.



Contrats, ententes et autres arrangements










Limitation



12. The Chief Administrator’s powers, duties and functions do not extend to any of the powers, duties and functions conferred by law on any administrative tribunal or on any of its members.









12. L’administrateur en chef ne peut exercer les attributions qu’une règle de droit confère à un tribunal administratif ou à l’un de ses membres.



Restriction










Delegation



13. The Chief Administrator may delegate to any employee of the Service any of the powers, duties, and functions conferred on the Chief Administrator under this Act or any other Act of Parliament.









13. L’administrateur en chef peut déléguer à tout membre du personnel du Service les attributions qui lui sont conférées sous le régime de la présente loi ou de toute autre loi fédérale.



Délégation










ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL CHAIRPERSONS









PRÉSIDENTS DES TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS












For greater certainty



14. For greater certainty, the chairperson of an administrative tribunal continues to have supervision over and direction of the work of the tribunal.









14. Il est entendu que le président d’un tribunal administratif continue d’assurer la direction du tribunal et d’en contrôler les activités.



Précision










EMPLOYEES OF THE SERVICE









PERSONNEL












Appointment of employees



15. The employees who are required for the purposes of the Service are to be appointed under the Public Service Employment Act.









15. Le personnel nécessaire à l’exécution des travaux du Service est nommé conformément à la Loi sur l’emploi dans la fonction publique.



Nomination










GENERAL









DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES












Deeming — filing documents and giving notice



16. Any provision of an Act of Parliament, or of a regulation, that requires the filing of a document with, or the giving of a notice to, an administrative tribunal is deemed to require that document to be filed with, or the notice to be given to, the Service, as the case may be.









16. Toute disposition d’une loi fédérale ou d’un règlement qui exige le dépôt d’un document auprès d’un tribunal administratif ou la fourniture d’un avis à celui-ci est réputée exiger le dépôt du document auprès du Service ou la fourniture de l’avis à celui-ci, selon le cas.



Présomption : dépôt de documents et fourniture d’avis










Deeming — amounts payable



17. Any provision of an Act of Parliament, or of a regulation, that requires an amount to be paid to an administrative tribunal is deemed to require that amount to be paid to the Service.









17. Toute disposition d’une loi fédérale ou d’un règlement qui exige qu’une somme soit versée à un tribunal administratif est réputée exiger que la somme soit versée au Service.



Présomption : versement de sommes










Amounts for operation of administrative tribunal



18. Any amount to be paid for the operation of any administrative tribunal may be paid out of moneys appropriated by Parliament for the expenditures of the Service.









18. Toute somme devant être versée pour le fonctionnement d’un tribunal administratif peut être prélevée sur les crédits affectés par le Parlement pour les dépenses du Service.



Sommes versées pour le fonctionnement du tribunal administratif










Transitional Provisions









Dispositions transitoires












Definitions



377. The following definitions apply in sections 378 to 381.




“administrative tribunal”« tribunal administratif »



“administrative tribunal” means any of the following:








(a) the Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board;








(b) the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal;








(c) the Canada Industrial Relations Board;








(d) the Competition Tribunal;








(e) the Review Tribunal;








(f) the Canadian International Trade Tribunal;








(g) the Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada;








(h) the Social Security Tribunal;








(i) the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal;








(j) the Specific Claims Tribunal;








(k) the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board.




“Chief Administrator”« administrateur en chef »



“Chief Administrator” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act.




“Registry”« greffe »



“Registry” means any of the following:








(a) the Registry of the Competition Tribunal;








(b) the Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal;








(c) the Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal.




“Service”« Service »



“Service” means the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada established by section 3 of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act.









377. Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent aux articles 378 à 381.



Définitions




« administrateur en chef » S’entend au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs.



« administrateur en chef »“Chief Administrator”




« greffe » Selon le cas :



« greffe »“Registry”




a) le Greffe du Tribunal de la concurrence;








b) le Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles;








c) le Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières.








« Service » Le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs constitué par l’article 3 de la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs.



« Service »“Service”




« tribunal administratif » Selon le cas :



« tribunal administratif »“administrative tribunal”




a) la Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels;








b) le Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne;








c) le Conseil canadien des relations industrielles;








d) le Tribunal de la concurrence;








e) la Commission de révision;








f) le Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur;








g) le Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada;








h) le Tribunal de la sécurité sociale;








i) le Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles;








j) le Tribunal des revendications particulières;








k) la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique.














Employment continued — administrative tribunal



378. (1) Nothing in this Division is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, immediately before the day on which this Division comes into force, occupies a position in an administrative tribunal referred to in paragraph (b), (c), (f) or (g) of the definition “administrative tribunal” in section 377, except that the person is to, as of that day, occupy their position in the Service.









378. (1) La présente section ne change rien à la situation des membres du personnel qui, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, occupaient un poste au sein de l’un ou l’autre des tribunaux administratifs mentionnés aux alinéas b), c), f) ou g) de la définition de ce terme à l’article 377, à la différence près que, à compter de cette date, ils l’occupent au sein du Service.



Postes — tribunaux administratifs










Employment continued — Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board



(2) Nothing in this Division is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, on the day on which subsection 4(1) of the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board Act, as enacted by section 365 of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 comes into force, is employed by the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board, except that the person is to, as of that day, occupy their position in the Service.









(2) La présente section ne change rien à la situation des personnes qui, à la date d’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique, édictée par l’article 365 de la Loi no2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013, sont membres du personnel de la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique, à la différence près que, à compter de cette date, elles occupent leur poste au sein du Service.



Postes — Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique










Employment continued — Registry



(3) Nothing in this Division is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, immediately before the day on which this Division comes into force, occupies a position in a Registry, except that the person is to, as of that day, occupy their position in the Service.









(3) La présente section ne change rien à la situation des membres du personnel qui, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, occupaient un poste au sein d’un greffe, à la différence près que, à compter de cette date, ils l’occupent au sein du Service.



Postes — greffe










Employment continued — portions of federal public administration



(4) Nothing in this Division is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, immediately before the day on which this Division comes into force, occupies a position in one of the following portions of the federal public administration, except that the person is to, as of that day, occupy their position in the Service:








(a) the portion of the Department of Canadian Heritage known as the Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board Secretariat;








(b) the portion of the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food known as the Review Tribunal Support Service;








(c) the portion of the Department of Employment and Social Development known as the Social Security Tribunal Support Service.









(4) La présente section ne change rien à la situation des membres du personnel qui, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, occupaient un poste au sein de l’un des secteurs de l’administration publique ci-après, à la différence près que, à compter de cette date, ils l’occupent au sein du Service :



Postes — secteur de l’administration publique




a) au ministère du Patrimoine canadien, le secteur appelé le Secrétariat de la Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels;








b) au ministère de l’Agriculture et de l’Agroalimentaire, le secteur appelé Service d’appui de la Commission de révision;








c) au ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social, le secteur appelé Service d’appui du Tribunal de la sécurité sociale.














Managerial or confidential position



(5) For greater certainty, a person’s status includes whether or not they occupy a managerial or confidential position.









(5) Il est entendu que la situation d’un membre du personnel vise également le fait qu’il occupe ou non un poste de direction ou de confiance.



Poste de direction ou de confiance










Powers and duties



379. A person referred to in section 378 whom an administrative tribunal has authorised to exercise certain powers or perform certain duties or functions relat-ing to a matter before that administrative tribunal remains, on the day on which this Division comes into force, authorized to exercise those powers and perform those duties and functions despite the operation of that section.









379. Tout membre du personnel visé à l’article 378 qui est autorisé par un tribunal administratif à exercer toute attribution relativement à une affaire dont ce dernier est saisi à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section le demeure, et ce malgré l’application de cet article.



Attributions










Appropriations — administrative tribunal



380. (1) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of an administrative tribunal referred to in paragraph (b), (c), (f) or (g) of the definition “administrative tribunal” in section 377 and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









380. (1) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses des tribunaux administratifs mentionnés à l’un ou l’autre des alinéas b), c), f) ou g) de la définition de ce terme à l’article 377 sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — tribunaux administratifs










Appropriations — Public Service Labour Relations Board or Public Service Staffing Tribunal



(2) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which subsection 4(1) of the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board Act, as enacted by section 365 of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 comes into force, to defray any expenditure of the Public Service Labour Relations Board or the Public Service Staffing Tribunal and that, on the day on which that subsection 4(1) comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(2) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur du paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique, édictée par l’article 365 de la Loi no2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses de la Commission des relations de travail dans la fonction publique ainsi que celles affectées aux dépenses du Tribunal de la dotation de la fonction publique sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — Commission des relations de travail dans la fonction publique et Tribunal de la dotation de la fonction publique










Appropriations — Registries



(3) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of a Registry and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(3) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses d’un greffe sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — greffes










Appropriations — Department of Canadian Heritage



(4) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of the Department of Canadian Heritage related to the Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(4) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses du ministère du Patrimoine canadien liées à la Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — ministère du Patrimoine canadien










Appropriations — Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food



(5) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food related to the Review Tribunal and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(5) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses du ministère de l’Agriculture et de l’Agroalimentaire liées à la Commission de révision sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — ministère de l’Agriculture et de l’Agroalimentaire










Appropriations — Canadian Food Inspection Agency



(6) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency related to the Review Tribunal and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(6) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses de l’Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments liées à la Commission de révision sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — Agence canadienne d’inspection des aliments










Appropriations — Department of Employment and Social Development



(7) Any money that is appropriated by an Act of Parliament, for the fiscal year in which this Division comes into force, to defray any expenditure of the Department of Employment and Social Development related to the Social Security Tribunal and that, on the day on which this Division comes into force, is unexpended is deemed, on that day, to be an amount appropriated to defray any expenditure of the Service.









(7) Les sommes affectées — et non déboursées —, pour l’exercice en cours à l’entrée en vigueur de la présente section, par toute loi fédérale, aux dépenses du ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social liées au Tribunal de la sécurité sociale sont réputées avoir été affectées aux dépenses du Service.



Transfert de crédits — ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social










Contracts



381. (1) A contract respecting the provision of services or materiel to an administrative tribunal entered into by one of the following persons is deemed to have been entered into by the Chief Administrator of the Service:








(a) a member, officer or employee of an administrative tribunal referred to in paragraph (b), (c), (f), (g) or (k) of the definition “administrative tribunal” in section 377;








(b) an officer or employee of a Registry;








(c) the Minister of Canadian Heritage or an officer or employee of the Department of Canadian Heritage;








(d) the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food or an officer or employee of the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food;








(e) the Minister of Employment and Social Development or an officer or employee of the Department of Employment and Social Development.









381. (1) Le contrat relatif à la fourniture de services ou de matériels à un tribunal administratif conclu par l’une des personnes ci-après est réputé avoir été conclu par l’administrateur en chef du Service :



Contrat




a) un membre, un dirigeant ou un membre du personnel d’un tribunal administratif mentionné à l’un ou l’autre des alinéas b), c), f), g) ou k) de la définition de ce terme à l’article 377;








b) un dirigeant ou un membre du personnel d’un greffe;








c) le ministre du Patrimoine canadien ou un dirigeant ou un fonctionnaire du ministère du Patrimoine canadien;








d) le ministre de l’Agriculture et de l’Agroalimentaire ou un dirigeant ou un fonctionnaire du ministère de l’Agriculture et de l’Agroalimentaire;








e) le ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social ou un dirigeant ou un fonctionnaire du ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social.














References



(2) Unless the context otherwise requires, in a contract referred to in subsection (1), every reference to one of the persons referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (e) is to be read as a reference to the Chief Administrator of the Service.









(2) Sauf indication contraire du contexte, dans les contrats visés au paragraphe (1), les renvois à toute personne mentionnée à l’un ou l’autre des alinéas (1)a) à e) valent renvois à l’administrateur en chef du Service.



Renvois










Consequential Amendments









Modifications corrélatives










R.S., c. A-1



Access to Information Act









Loi sur l’accès à l’information



L.R., ch. A-1










1998, c. 26, s. 71



382. Schedule I to the Access to Information Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









382. L’annexe I de la Loi sur l’accès à l’information est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 71












Canada Industrial Relations Board






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 









Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 






Canada Industrial Relations Board 














383. Schedule I to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITU- TIONS”:









383. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :














Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board






Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels









Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels 






Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board 












1998, c. 9, s. 36



384. Schedule I to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITU- TIONS”:









384. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 9, art. 36












Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne 









Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne 






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 












R.S., c. 47 (4th Supp.), s. 52 (Sch., subitem 1(2))



385. Schedule I to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITU- TIONS”:









385. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 47 (4e suppl.), art. 52, ann., no 1(2)












Canadian International Trade Tribunal






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur









Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur 






Canadian International Trade Tribunal 












2005, c. 46, s. 55.1; 2006, c. 9, s. 221



386. Schedule I to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITU- TIONS”:









386. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 46, art. 55.1; 2006, ch. 9, art. 221












Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 









Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 






Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 












2008, c. 22, s. 44



387. Schedule I to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITU- TIONS”:









387. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 22, art. 44












Specific Claims Tribunal 






Tribunal des revendications particulières









Tribunal des revendications particulières 






Specific Claims Tribunal 














388. Schedule I to the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









388. L’annexe I de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :














Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs









Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada










R.S., c. C-34



Competition Act









Loi sur la concurrence



L.R., ch. C-34










R.S., c. 19 (2nd Supp.), s. 45



389. Section 89 of the Competition Act is replaced by the following:









389. L’article 89 de la Loi sur la concurrence est remplacé par ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 19 (2e suppl.), art. 45










Register of specialization agreements



89. (1) The Tribunal shall cause to be maintained a register of specialization agreements, and any modifications of those agreements, that the Tribunal has directed be registered, and any such agreements and modifications shall be included in the register for the periods specified in the orders.









89. (1) Le Tribunal voit à ce que soit maintenu un registre des accords de spécialisation et de leurs modifications, dont il a ordonné l’inscription; ces accords et leurs modifications y restent inscrits pour les périodes fixées par les ordonnances.



Registre des accords de spécialisation










Public register



(2) The register shall be accessible to the public.









(2) Le registre est accessible au public.



Registre public








R.S., c. C-51



Cultural Property Export and Import Act









Loi sur l’exportation et l’importation de biens culturels



L.R., ch. C-51










1991, c. 49, s. 217(1)



390. Subsection 22(2) of the Cultural Property Export and Import Act is replaced by the following:









390. Le paragraphe 22(2) de la Loi sur l’exportation et l’importation de biens culturels est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1991, ch. 49, par. 217(1)










Valuation experts



(2) The power of the Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Serv-ice of Canada under subsection 11(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act may be exercised to engage the services of valuation experts to assist the Review Board in making determinations pursuant to section 30 respecting fair cash offers to purchase or pursuant to section 32 respecting the fair market value of objects disposed of, or proposed to be disposed of, to institutions or public authorities.









(2) L’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs peut exercer le pouvoir que lui confère le paragraphe 11(2) de la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs pour retenir les services d’experts en estimations chargés d’aider la Commission à fixer conformément à l’article 30 un juste montant pour les offres d’achat au comptant ou à fixer conformément à l’article 32 la juste valeur marchande d’objets qu’une personne aliène ou se propose d’aliéner au profit d’un établissement ou d’une administration.



Estimations












391. Section 23 of the Act and the heading before it are repealed.









391. L’article 23 de la même loi et l’intertitre le précédant sont abrogés.












1999, c. 17, s. 122; 2005, c. 38, par. 138(f)



392. Subsection 33(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









392. Le paragraphe 33(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 17, art. 122; 2005, ch. 38, al. 138f)










Communication of information



(2) A member of the Review Board or an official of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada may communicate to an official of the Canada Revenue Agency, solely for the purposes of administering the Income Tax Act, information obtained under this Act for the purposes of administering this section and sections 32, 33.1 and 33.2.









(2) Un membre de la Commission ou un fonctionnaire du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs peut communiquer à un fonctionnaire de l’Agence du revenu du Canada un renseignement obtenu en vertu de la présente loi en vue de l’application du présent article et des articles 32, 33.1 et 33.2, uniquement aux fins d’application de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.



Communication de renseignements








R.S., c. E-15



Excise Tax Act









Loi sur la taxe d’accise



L.R., ch. E-15










2007, c. 18, s. 19(1)



393. Subsection 216(4) of the Excise Tax Act is replaced by the following:









393. Le paragraphe 216(4) de la Loi sur la taxe d’accise est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2007, ch. 18, par. 19(1)










Appeals of determination of tax status



(4) In applying the Customs Act to a determination of the tax status of goods, the references in that Act to the “Canadian International Trade Tribunal” shall be read as references to the “Tax Court of Canada”.









(4) Pour l’application de la Loi sur les douanes au classement de produits, les mentions, dans cette loi, du Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur valent mention de la Cour canadienne de l’impôt.



Appels concernant le classement








R.S., c. F-11



Financial Administration Act









Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques



L.R., ch. F-11










1998, c. 26, s. 75; SOR/99-152



394. Schedule I.1 to the Financial Administration Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









394. L’annexe I.1 de la Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 75; DORS/99-152












Canada Industrial Relations Board 






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Minister of Labour’’.









Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 






Canada Industrial Relations Board






ainsi que de la mention « Le ministre du Travail », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce secteur.












1998, c. 9, s. 43



395. Schedule I.1 to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









395. L’annexe I.1 de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 9, art. 43












Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Minister of Justice’’.









Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 






ainsi que de la mention « Le ministre de la Justice », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce secteur.












1992, c. 1, s. 72



396. Schedule I.1 to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









396. L’annexe I.1 de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



1992, ch. 1, art. 72












Canadian International Trade Tribunal






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Minister of Finance’’.









Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur 






Canadian International Trade Tribunal






ainsi que de la mention « Le ministre des Finances », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce secteur.












1992, c. 1, s. 72; 1995, c. 1, s. 43; 2005, c. 46, s. 56.3; 2006, c. 9, s. 222; 2008, c. 22, s. 47



397. Schedule I.1 to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the references to









397. L’annexe I.1 de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



1992, ch. 1, art. 72; 1995, ch. 1, art. 43; 2005, ch. 46, art. 56.3; 2006, ch. 9, art. 222; 2008, ch. 22, art. 47












Registry of the Competition Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal de la concurrence






Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières






and the corresponding references in column II to “Minister of Industry”, “Minister of Canadian Heritage” and “Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development”, respectively.









Greffe du Tribunal de la concurrence 






Registry of the Competition Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 






Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières 






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal






ainsi que des mentions « Le ministre de l’Industrie », « Le ministre du Patrimoine canadien » et « Le ministre des Affaires indiennes et du Nord canadien », dans la colonne II, en regard de ces secteurs, respectivement.












2001, c. 29, s. 54



398. Schedule I.1 to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









398. L’annexe I.1 de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2001, ch. 29, art. 54












Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada 






Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Minister of Transport’’.









Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada 






Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada






ainsi que de la mention « Le ministre des Transports », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce secteur.














399. Schedule I.1 to the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order in column I, a reference to









399. L’annexe I.1 de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :














Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






and a corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Minister of Justice’’.









Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






ainsi que de la mention « Le ministre de la Justice », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce secteur.












2003, c. 22, s. 11



400. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









400. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 22, art. 11












Canada Industrial Relations Board 






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles









Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 






Canada Industrial Relations Board 












2003, c. 22, s. 11



401. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









401. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 22, art. 11












Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne









Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 












2003, c. 22, s. 11



402. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









402. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 22, art. 11












Canadian International Trade Tribunal






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur









Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur 






Canadian International Trade Tribunal 












2003, c. 22, s. 11



403. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









403. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 22, art. 11












Competition Tribunal 






Tribunal de la concurrence 









Tribunal de la concurrence 






Competition Tribunal 












2005, c. 46, s. 56.4; 2006, c. 9, s. 222; SOR/2012-58, s. 2



404. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









404. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 46, art. 56.4; 2006, ch. 9, art. 222; DORS/2012-58, art. 2












Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières









Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 






Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières 






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal 












2003, c. 22, par. 265(b)



405. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by striking out the following:









405. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par suppression de ce qui suit :



2003, ch. 22, al. 265b)












Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada 






Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada









Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada 






Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada 














406. Schedule IV to the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









406. L’annexe IV de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :














Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs









Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada












2006, c. 9, s. 270



407. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









407. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 270












Canada Industrial Relations Board 






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Chairperson’’.









Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 






Canada Industrial Relations Board






ainsi que de la mention « Président », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.












2006, c. 9, s. 270



408. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









408. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 270












Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Chairperson’’.









Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 






ainsi que de la mention « Président », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.












2006, c. 9, s. 270



409. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









409. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 270












Canadian International Trade Tribunal






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Chairperson’’.









Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur 






Canadian International Trade Tribunal 






ainsi que de la mention « Président », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.












2006, c. 9, s. 275



410. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









410. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 275












Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 






Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Registrar’’.









Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 






Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal






ainsi que de la mention « Registraire », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.












2006, c. 9, s. 270; 2008, c. 22, s. 49



411. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the references to









411. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 270; 2008, ch. 22, art. 49












Registry of the Competition Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal de la concurrence






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières






and the corresponding references in column II to ‘‘Registrar’’.









Greffe du Tribunal de la concurrence 






Registry of the Competition Tribunal






Greffe du Tribunal des revendications particulières 






Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal






ainsi que de la mention « Registraire » et « Greffier », dans la colonne II, en regard de ces ministères, respectivement.












2006, c. 9, s. 270



412. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by striking out, in column I, the reference to









412. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



2006, ch. 9, art. 270












Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada 






Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada






and the corresponding reference in column II to ‘‘Chairperson’’.









Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada 






Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada






ainsi que de la mention « Administrateur en chef », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.














413. Part III of Schedule VI to the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order in column I, a reference to









413. La partie III de l’annexe VI de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, dans la colonne I, de ce qui suit :



















Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






and a corresponding reference in column II to “Chief Administrator”.














Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






ainsi que de la mention « Administrateur en chef », dans la colonne II, en regard de ce ministère.










R.S., c. H-6



Canadian Human Rights Act









Loi canadienne sur les droits de la personne



L.R., ch. H-6










1998, c. 9, s. 27



414. Subsection 48.4(2) of the Canadian Human Rights Act is replaced by the following:









414. Le paragraphe 48.4(2) de la Loi canadienne sur les droits de la personne est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 9, art. 27










Functions of Chairperson



(2) The Chairperson has supervision over and direction of the work of the Tribunal, including the allocation of work among the members and the management of the Tribunal’s internal affairs.









(2) Le président assure la direction du Tribunal et en contrôle les activités, notamment en ce qui a trait à la répartition des tâches entre les membres et à la gestion de ses affaires internes.



Fonctions du président










1998, c. 9, s. 27



415. Section 48.8 of the Act is repealed.









415. L’article 48.8 de la même loi est abrogé.



1998, ch. 9, art. 27








R.S., c. L-2



Canada Labour Code









Code canadien du travail



L.R., ch. L-2










1998, c. 26, s. 2



416. (1) The portion of subsection 12.01(1) of the Canada Labour Code before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









416. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 12.01(1) du Code canadien du travail précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 2










Functions of Chairperson



12.01 (1) The Chairperson has supervision over and direction of the work of the Board, including









12.01 (1) Le président assure la direction du Conseil et en contrôle les activités, notamment en ce qui a trait à :



Fonctions du président










1998, c. 26, s. 2



(2) Subsection 12.01(1) of the Act is amended by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (d), by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (e) and by repealing paragraph (f).









(2) L’alinéa 12.01(1)f) de la même loi est abrogé.



1998, ch. 26, art. 2










1998, c. 26, s. 2



(3) Subsection 12.01(3) of the Act is repealed.









(3) Le paragraphe 12.01(3) de la même loi est abrogé.



1998, ch. 26, art. 2










1998, c. 26, s. 2



417. Sections 13 and 13.1 of the Act are replaced by the following:









417. Les articles 13 et 13.1 de la même loi sont remplacés par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 2










Head office



13. The head office of the Board must be in the National Capital Region as described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.









13. Le siège du Conseil est fixé dans la région de la capitale nationale, délimitée à l’annexe de la Loi sur la capitale nationale.



Siège










1998, c. 26, s. 3(3)



418. Paragraph 15(p) of the Act is replaced by the following:









418. L’alinéa 15p) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, par. 3(3)












(p) the authority of any person to act on behalf of the Board and the matters and things to be done and the action to be taken by that person, including the authority of an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada to make decisions on uncontested applications or questions; and









p) la délégation de ses fonctions et les pouvoirs et obligations des délégataires, notamment la délégation de ses fonctions aux membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs à l’égard de la détermination des demandes ou questions non contestées;












1998, c. 26, s. 4



419. Subsection 15.1(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









419. Le paragraphe 15.1(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 4










General power to assist parties



15.1 (1) The Board or any member of the Board or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada who is authorized by the Board may, if the parties agree, assist the parties in resolving any issues in dispute at any stage of a proceeding and by any means that the Board considers appropriate, without prejudice to the Board’s power to determine issues that have not been settled.









15.1 (1) Le Conseil ou l’un de ses membres — ou un membre du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs autorisé par le Conseil — peut, en tout état de cause et avec le consentement des parties, aider les parties à régler les questions en litige de la façon que le Conseil juge indiquée sans qu’il soit porté atteinte à la compétence du Conseil de trancher les questions qui n’auront pas été réglées.



Pouvoir général d’aider les parties










1999, c. 31, par. 162(p)(E); 2003, c. 22, par. 224(o)(E)



420. Section 119 of the Act is replaced by the following:









420. L’article 119 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 31, al. 162p)(A); 2003, ch. 22, al. 224o)(A)










Member of Board, conciliation board, etc., not required to give evidence



119. (1) No member of the Board or a conciliation board, conciliation officer, conciliation commissioner, officer or employee employed in the federal public administration or person appointed by the Board or the Minister under this Part shall be required to give evidence in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the discharge of their duties under this Part.









119. (1) Les membres du Conseil ou d’une commission de conciliation, les conciliateurs, les commissaires-conciliateurs, les fonctionnaires ou autres personnes faisant partie de l’administration publique fédérale ainsi que toutes les personnes nommées par le Conseil ou le ministre aux termes de la présente partie ne sont pas tenus de déposer dans une action — ou toute autre procédure — au civil, relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice des fonctions qui leur sont confiées en application de la présente partie.



Dépositions en justice










Chief Administrator and employees not required to give evidence



(2) Neither the Chief Administrator nor an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada shall be required to give evidence in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the discharge of their duties in providing services to the Board.









(2) L’administrateur en chef et les membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs ne sont pas tenus de déposer dans une action — ou toute autre procédure — au civil, relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions dans le cadre de la prestation de services au Conseil.



Administrateur en chef et personnel








R.S., c. P-21



Privacy Act









Loi sur la protection des renseignements personnels



L.R., ch. P-21










1998, c. 26, s. 78



421. The schedule to the Privacy Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









421. L’annexe de la Loi sur la protection des renseignements personnels est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 26, art. 78












Canada Industrial Relations Board






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 









Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 






Canada Industrial Relations Board 














422. The schedule to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









422. L’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :














Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board






Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels









Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels 






Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board 












1998, c. 9, s. 45



423. The schedule to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









423. L’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



1998, ch. 9, art. 45












Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne









Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 












R.S., c. 47 (4th Supp.), s. 52, (Sch., subitem 7(2))



424. The schedule to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









424. L’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



L.R., ch. 47 (4e suppl.), art. 52, ann., no 7(2)












Canadian International Trade Tribunal






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur









Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur 






Canadian International Trade Tribunal 












2005, c. 46, s. 58.1; 2006, c. 9, s. 224



425. The schedule to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









425. L’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 46, art. 58.1; 2006, ch. 9, art. 224












Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 






Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 









Greffe du Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 






Registry of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 












2008, c. 22, s. 50



426. The schedule to the Act is amended by striking out the following under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









426. L’annexe de la même est modifiée par suppression, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :



2008, ch. 22, art. 50












Specific Claims Tribunal 






Tribunal des revendications particulières









Tribunal des revendications particulières 






Specific Claims Tribunal 














427. The schedule to the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order under the heading “OTHER GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS”:









427. L’annexe de la même loi est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, sous l’intertitre « AUTRES INSTITUTIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :














Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs









Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada










R.S., c. S-15



Special Import Measures Act









Loi sur les mesures spéciales d’importation



L.R., ch. S-15












428. The definition “Secretary” in subsection 2(1) of the Special Import Measures Act is repealed.









428. La définition de « secrétaire », au paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les mesures spéciales d’importation, est abrogée.












1999, c. 12, s. 17



429. Subsection 34(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









429. Le paragraphe 34(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 17










Tribunal to make preliminary inquiry



(2) The Tribunal shall, without delay after receipt under subparagraph (1)(a)(i) of a notice of an initiation of an investigation, make a preliminary inquiry (which need not include an oral hearing) into whether the evidence discloses a reasonable indication that the dumping or subsidizing of the goods has caused injury or retardation or is threatening to cause injury.









(2) Dès réception de l’avis prévu au sous-alinéa (1)a)(i), le Tribunal procède à une enquête préliminaire — qui n’a pas à inclure d’audition — afin de déterminer si les éléments de preuve indiquent, de façon raisonnable, que le dumping ou le subventionnement des marchandises a causé un dommage ou un retard ou menace de causer un dommage.



Enquête préliminaire du Tribunal










1988, c. 65, s. 31; 1994, c. 47, par. 186(d)



430. Paragraph 41.1(2)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









430. Le paragraphe 41.1(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 44, art. 208; 1994, ch. 47, al. 186d); 2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.1)












(b) cause notice of the action taken pursuant to paragraph (a) to be given and published as provided in paragraph 34(1)(a) and to be given in writing to the Tribunal and the Canadian Secretary.









(2) Après le renvoi à lui, en application des paragraphes 77.015(3) ou (4), 77.019(5), 77.15(3) ou (4) ou 77.19(4), d’une décision définitive rendue au titre de l’alinéa 41(1)a) ou de sa décision de clore l’enquête rendue au titre de l’alinéa 41(1)b), le président réexamine la décision en cause, la confirme, l’annule ou, dans le cas d’une décision définitive, la modifie. Il fait donner et publier un avis correspondant conformément à l’alinéa 34(1)a) et en fait transmettre une copie au Tribunal et au secrétaire canadien.












1994, c. 47, s. 169



431. (1) The portion of subsection 42(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









431. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 42(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 169










Tribunal to make inquiry



42. (1) The Tribunal, forthwith after receipt pursuant to subsection 38(3) of a notice of a preliminary determination, shall make inquiry with respect to such of the following matters as is appropriate in the circumstances:









42. (1) Dès réception de l’avis de décision provisoire prévu au paragraphe 38(3), le Tribunal fait enquête sur celles parmi les questions suivantes qui sont indiquées dans les circonstances, à savoir :



Enquête du Tribunal










1994, c. 47, s. 169



(2) The portion of subsection 42(2) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 42(2) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 169










Tribunal to make or resume inquiry



(2) Where the Tribunal receives a notice pursuant to paragraph 52(1)(e) in respect of goods with respect to which an undertaking or undertakings have been terminated, it shall, unless it has already made a finding with respect to the goods, forthwith make or resume its inquiry as to whether the dumping or subsidizing









(2) Sur réception, aux termes de l’alinéa 52(1)e), d’un avis relatif à des marchandises pour lesquelles il a été mis fin à un ou plusieurs engagements, le Tribunal, s’il n’a pas déjà rendu de conclusions au sujet des marchandises, procède sans délai à l’ouverture ou à la poursuite de l’enquête pour déterminer si le dumping ou le subventionnement :



Ouverture ou poursuite de l’enquête












432. (1) Subsection 43(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









432. (1) Le paragraphe 43(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Tribunal to make order or finding



43. (1) In any inquiry referred to in section 42 in respect of any goods, the Tribunal shall, forthwith after the date of receipt of notice of a final determination of dumping or subsidizing with respect to any of those goods, but, in any event, not later than one hundred and twenty days after the date of receipt of notice of a preliminary determination with respect to the goods, make such order or finding with respect to the goods to which the final determination applies as the nature of the matter may require, and shall declare to what goods, including, where applicable, from what supplier and from what country of export, the order or finding applies.









43. (1) Dans le cas des enquêtes visées à l’article 42, le Tribunal rend, à l’égard de marchandises faisant l’objet d’une décision définitive de dumping ou de subventionnement, les ordonnances ou les conclusions indiquées dans chaque cas en y précisant les marchandises concernées et, le cas échéant, leur fournisseur et leur pays d’exportation. Il rend ces ordonnances ou conclusions dès réception de l’avis de cette décision définitive mais, au plus tard, dans les cent vingt jours suivant la date à laquelle il reçoit l’avis de décision provisoire.



Ordonnances ou conclusions du Tribunal










2005, c. 38, par. 134(z.2)



(2) Subsection 43(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 43(2) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa b) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.2)










Notice of order or finding



(2) The Tribunal shall forward by registered mail to the President, the importer, the exporter and such other persons as may be specified by the rules of the Tribunal








(a) forthwith after it is made, a copy of each order or finding made by it pursuant to this section; and








(b) not later than fifteen days after the making of an order or finding by it pursuant to this section, a copy of the reasons for making the order or finding.









(2) Le Tribunal envoie, par courrier recommandé, au président, à l’importateur, à l’exportateur et aux autres personnes que prévoient ses règles, copie des textes suivants :



Copie des ordonnances ou conclusions




a) dès qu’elles ont été rendues en vertu du présent article, son ordonnance ou ses conclusions;














1988, c. 65, s. 32(2)



(3) Subsection 43(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(3) Le paragraphe 43(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1988, ch. 65, par. 32(2)










Publication of notice



(3) The Tribunal shall cause a notice of each order or finding made by it pursuant to this section to be published in the Canada Gazette.









(3) Le Tribunal fait publier dans la Gazette du Canada un avis de toute ordonnance ou de toutes conclusions qu’il rend en application du présent article.



Avis










2002, c. 8, s. 170(E)



433. Paragraph 44(2)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:









433. Le paragraphe 44(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2002, ch. 8, art. 170(A)












(a) the Tribunal shall without delay give notice of the recommencement of the inquiry with respect to those goods to every person to whom it forwarded, under subsection 43(2), a copy of the order or finding with respect to which the application under the Federal Courts Act was made; and









(2) En cas de réouverture d’enquête aux termes du paragraphe (1), le Tribunal :






a) donne sans délai avis de la réouverture à toute personne à qui il a envoyé une copie de l’ordonnance ou des conclusions en cause en application du paragraphe 43(2);






b) prend les mesures qu’il considère souhaitables pour rendre la nouvelle ordonnance ou les nouvelles conclusions, notamment par audition, nouvelle audition ou réception de nouveaux éléments de preuve.












1997, c. 14, s. 91



434. The portion of subsection 47(3) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









434. Le paragraphe 47(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1997, ch. 14, art. 91; 2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.4)










Notice of termination



(3) The Tribunal shall









(3) Le Tribunal notifie sans délai la clôture au président, à l’importateur, à l’exportateur, au gouvernement de la République du Chili et aux autres personnes que mentionnent ses règles; il en fait en outre donner avis dans la Gazette du Canada.



Avis de clôture










1988, c. 65, s. 36



435. Subparagraph 53.1(2)(a)(ii) of the Act is replaced by the following:









435. Le paragraphe 53.1(2) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 44, art. 211












(ii) cause notice of the action taken pursuant to subparagraph (i) to be given and published as provided in paragraph 34(1)(a) and filed with the Tribunal and the Canadian Secretary; and









(2) Après le renvoi à lui, en application des paragraphes 77.015(3) ou (4), 77.019(5), 77.15(3) ou (4) ou 77.19(4), d’une décision de renouveler ou non un engagement rendue au titre du paragraphe 53(1), le président réexamine celle-ci et la confirme, l’annule ou la modifie, fait donner et publier un avis correspondant conformément à l’alinéa 34(1)a) et le fait déposer auprès du Tribunal et du secrétaire canadien. L’engagement est, au besoin, censé avoir été renouvelé à la date de l’ordonnance de renvoi et est maintenu jusqu’à cette confirmation, cette annulation ou cette modification.












1993, c. 44, s. 216; 2005, c. 38,par. 134(z.15)



436. Subsection 61(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









436. Le paragraphe 61(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1993, ch. 44, art. 216; 2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.15)










Appeal to Tribunal



61. (1) Subject to section 77.012 or 77.12, a person who deems himself aggrieved by a re-determination of the President made pursuant to section 59 with respect to any goods may appeal therefrom to the Tribunal by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the President and the Tribunal within ninety days after the day on which the re-determination was made.









61. (1) Sous réserve des articles 77.012 et 77.12, quiconque s’estime lésé par un réexamen effectué en application de l’article 59 peut en appeler au Tribunal en déposant, auprès de celui-ci et du président, dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la date du réexamen, un avis d’appel.



Appel devant le Tribunal










1999, c. 12, s. 36



437. (1) Subsection 76.01(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









437. (1) Le paragraphe 76.01(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 36










Order if interim review not initiated



(4) If the Tribunal decides not to conduct an interim review at the request of a person or government, the Tribunal shall make an order to that effect and give reasons for it, and the Tribunal shall forward a copy of the order and the reasons to that person or government and cause notice of the order to be published in the Canada Gazette.









(4) S’il rejette la demande de réexamen intermédiaire, le Tribunal rend en ce sens une ordonnance motivée et en transmet copie à la personne ou au gouvernement et fait publier un avis dans la Gazette du Canada.



Ordonnance en cas de refus de réexamen intermédiaire










1999, c. 12, s. 36



(2) The portion of subsection 76.01(6) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 76.01(6) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 36; 2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.17)










Completion of review



(6) On completion of an interim review, the Tribunal shall









(6) Le Tribunal envoie au président, à toute autre personne ou à un gouvernement que peuvent préciser ses règles copie de l’ordonnance dès qu’il la rend et, dans les quinze jours qui suivent, l’exposé des motifs correspondants; il fait en outre publier dans la Gazette du Canada un avis de l’ordonnance.



Fin du réexamen










1999, c. 12, s. 36



438. The portion of subsection 76.02(5) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









438. Le paragraphe 76.02(5) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 36; 2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.18)










Notice



(5) On completion of a review, the Tribunal shall









(5) Le Tribunal transmet sans délai copie de la nouvelle ordonnance ou des nouvelles conclusions visées au paragraphe (4) au président et à toute autre personne ou à un gouvernement que peuvent préciser ses règles, ainsi qu’au secrétaire canadien dans le cas du réexamen visé au paragraphe (3), et, dans les quinze jours qui suivent la fin du réexamen, un exposé des motifs correspondants; il fait en outre publier un avis de l’ordonnance ou des conclusions dans la Gazette du Canada.



Avis










1999, c. 12, s. 36



439. (1) Subsection 76.03(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:









439. (1) Le paragraphe 76.03(5) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 36










Order of refusal



(5) If the Tribunal decides not to initiate an expiry review at the request of a person or government, the Tribunal shall make an order to that effect and give reasons for it, and the Tribunal shall forward a copy of the order and the reasons to that person or government and cause notice of the order to be published in the Canada Gazette.









(5) S’il rejette la demande d’examen relatif à l’expiration, le Tribunal rend en ce sens une ordonnance motivée, en transmet copie à la personne ou au gouvernement et fait publier un avis dans la Gazette du Canada.



Ordonnance de refus










1999, c. 12, s. 36



(2) The portion of subsection 76.03(6) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le passage du paragraphe 76.03(6) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa b) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 36










Notice



(6) If the Tribunal decides to initiate an expiry review, it shall without delay









(6) Lorsque le Tribunal décide de procéder au réexamen relatif à l’expiration, il doit sans délai :



Avis




a) fournir un avis de la décision au président et à toute autre personne ou à un gouvernement que peuvent préciser ses règles;














1988, c. 65, s. 42



440. Section 77.14 of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:









440. L’article 77.14 de la version française de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1988, ch. 65, art. 42










Dossier



77.14 Une fois les membres choisis, l’autorité compétente fait transmettre, conformément aux règles, copie du dossier administratif.









77.14 Une fois les membres choisis, l’autorité compétente fait transmettre, conformément aux règles, copie du dossier administratif.



Dossier












441. Paragraph 90(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









441. L’alinéa 90c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(c) shall not, if a statement pursuant to paragraph 89(2)(b) is made in the request, give its ruling on the question until after it makes an order or finding in the inquiry commenced as a consequence of its receipt of notice of the preliminary determination referred to in that paragraph, unless, after the request is made to the Tribunal, it receives notice pursuant to subsection 41(4) that the investigation has been terminated pursuant to subsection 41(1) in respect of the goods specified in the preliminary determination, in which case the Tribunal shall give its ruling on the question forthwith after it receives that notice.









c) dans le cas visé à l’alinéa 89(2)b), ne rend sa décision qu’après avoir rendu l’ordonnance ou les conclusions sur l’enquête ouverte à la suite de la réception de l’avis de décision provisoire ou, le cas échéant, dès la réception de l’avis de clôture d’enquête visé au paragraphe 41(4) et relatif aux marchandises précisées dans la décision provisoire.












2005, c. 38, par. 134(z.34)



442. (1) The portion of paragraph 91(3)(b) of the Act before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:









442. (1) Le passage de l’alinéa 91(3)b) de la même loi précédant le sous-alinéa (i) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 38, al. 134z.34)












(b) the Tribunal shall forward by registered mail to the President, the importer, the exporter and such other persons and governments as may be specified by the rules of the Tribunal









b) le Tribunal envoie, par courrier recommandé, au président, à l’importateur, à l’exportateur ainsi qu’aux autres personnes ou aux gouvernements que prévoient ses règles les documents suivants :












1988, c. 65, s. 43(1)



(2) Paragraph 91(3)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’alinéa 91(3)c) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1988, ch. 65, par. 43(1)












(c) where the Tribunal makes another order or finding pursuant to paragraph (a), it shall cause notice of the order or finding to be published in the Canada Gazette.









c) le Tribunal fait publier un avis de la nouvelle ordonnance ou des nouvelles conclusions dans la Gazette du Canada.












Replacement of references — “Secretary”



443. The Act is amended by replacing “Secretary” with “Tribunal” in the following provisions:








(a) subparagraph 34(1)(a)(i);








(b) subparagraph 35(2)(b)(i);








(c) paragraph 38(3)(b);








(d) paragraphs 41(3)(b) and (4)(b);








(e) paragraph 41.1(1)(b);








(f) subsection 45(2);








(g) paragraphs 52(1)(e) and (1.1)(e);








(h) subsection 53(4);








(i) subparagraph 53.1(1)(a)(ii);








(j) subsection 61(2);








(k) subsection 76.03(2) and paragraph 76.03(7)(b); and








(l) subparagraph 91(1)(d)(ii).









443. Dans les dispositions ci-après de la même loi, « secrétaire » est remplacé par « Tribunal » :



Remplacement de mentions — « secrétaire »




a) le sous-alinéa 34(1)a)(i);








b) l’alinéa 35(2)b);








c) l’alinéa 38(3)b);








d) les alinéas 41(3)b) et (4)b);








e) le paragraphe 41.1(1);








f) le paragraphe 45(2);








g) les alinéas 52(1)e) et (1.1)e);








h) le paragraphe 53(4);








i) le paragraphe 53.1(1);








j) le paragraphe 61(2);








k) le paragraphe 76.03(2) et l’alinéa 76.03(7)b);








l) le sous-alinéa 91(1)d)(ii).














Application



444. The following provisions of the Act, as enacted or amended by sections 429 to 443, apply to goods of a NAFTA country, as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Act:








(a) subparagraph 34(1)(a)(i) and subsection 34(2);








(b) paragraph 35(2)(b);








(c) paragraph 38(3)(b);








(d) paragraphs 41(3)(b) and (4)(b);








(e) subsections 41.1(1) and (2);








(f) subsections 42(1) and (2);








(g) subsections 43(1) to (3);








(h) subsection 44(2);








(i) subsection 45(2);








(j) subsection 47(3);








(k) paragraphs 52(1)(e) and (1.1)(e);








(l) subsection 53(4);








(m) subsections 53.1(1) and (2);








(n) subsections 61(1) and (2);








(o) subsections 76.01(4) and (6);








(p) subsection 76.02(5);








(q) subsections 76.03(2), (5) and (6) and paragraph 76.03(7)(b);








(r) section 77.14;








(s) paragraph 90(c); and








(t) subparagraph 91(1)(d)(ii) and paragraphs 91(3)(b) and (c).









444. Les dispositions ci-après de la même loi, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par les articles 429 à 443, s’appliquent aux marchandises d’un pays ALÉNA, au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de cette loi :



Application




a) le sous-alinéa 34(1)a)(i) et le paragraphe 34(2);








b) l’alinéa 35(2)b);








c) l’alinéa 38(3)b);








d) les alinéas 41(3)b) et (4)b);








e) les paragraphes 41.1(1) et (2);








f) les paragraphes 42(1) et (2);








g) les paragraphes 43(1) à (3);








h) le paragraphe 44(2);








i) le paragraphe 45(2);








j) le paragraphe 47(3);








k) les alinéas 52(1)e) et (1.1)e);








l) le paragraphe 53(4);








m) les paragraphes 53.1(1) et (2);








n) les paragraphes 61(1) et (2);








o) les paragraphes 76.01(4) et (6);








p) le paragraphe 76.02(5);








q) les paragraphes 76.03(2), (5) et (6) et l’alinéa 76.03(7)b);








r) l’article 77.14;








s) l’alinéa 90c);








t) le sous-alinéa 91(1)d)(ii) et les alinéas 91(3)b) et c).












R.S., c. 1 (2nd Supp.)



Customs Act









Loi sur les douanes



L.R., ch. 1 (2e suppl.)










1997, c. 36, s. 172



445. (1) Paragraph 71(1)(b) of the Customs Act is replaced by the following:









445. (1) L’alinéa 71(1)b) de la Loi sur les douanes est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1997, ch. 36, art. 172












(b) in sections 67 and 68, the expression “court” is deemed to be substituted for the expression “Canadian International Trade Tribunal”.









b) aux articles 67 et 68, l’expression « tribunal » est réputée remplacer l’expression « Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur ».












1990, c. 17, s. 16(1); 1998, c. 30, par. 12(a)



(2) The definition “clerk of the court” in subsection 71(2) of the Act is repealed.









(2) La définition de « greffier du tribunal », au paragraphe 71(2) de la même loi, est abrogée.



1990, ch. 17, par. 16(1); 1998, ch. 30, al. 12a)










Replacement of references — “the Secretary of the Canadian International Trade Tribunal”



446. The Act is amended by replacing “the Secretary of the Canadian International Trade Tribunal” with “the Canadian International Trade Tribunal” in the following provisions:








(a) subsection 60.2(2);








(b) subsections 67(1) and (2); and








(c) subsection 67.1(3).









446. La même loi est modifiée :



Remplacement de mentions — « secrétaire du Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur »




a) par remplacement, au paragraphe 60.2(2), de « secrétaire du Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur » par « Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur »;








b) par remplacement, aux paragraphes 67(1) et (2), de « secrétaire de ce Tribunal » par « Tribunal »;








c) par remplacement, au paragraphe 67.1(3), de « secrétaire du Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur » par « Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur ».












R.S., c. 19 (2nd Supp.)



Competition Tribunal Act









Loi sur le Tribunal de la concurrence



L.R., ch. 19 (2e suppl.)












447. Section 14 of the Competition Tribunal Act is repealed.









447. L’article 14 de la Loi sur le Tribunal de la concurrence est abrogé.














448. Paragraph 16(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









448. L’alinéa 16(1)b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(b) for carrying out the work of the Tribunal and the management of its internal affairs.









b) concernant l’accomplissement de ses travaux et la gestion de ses affaires internes.










R.S., c. 20 (4th Supp.)



Canada Agricultural Products Act









Loi sur les produits agricoles au Canada



L.R., ch. 20 (4e suppl.)










1995, c. 40, s. 29



449. Section 4.3 of the Canada Agricultural Products Act is replaced by the following:









449. L’article 4.3 de la Loi sur les produits agricoles au Canada est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1995, ch. 40, art. 29










Contractual assistance



4.3 The Board may, for specific projects, enter into contracts for the services of persons having technical or specialized knowledge of any matter relating to the work of the Board to advise and assist it in the exercise of its powers or the performance of its duties and functions under this Act.









4.3 Le Conseil peut, pour des travaux déterminés, engager à contrat des experts dans les domaines relevant de son champ d’activité.



Assistance contractuelle










1995, c. 40, s. 29



450. Subsection 5(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:









450. Le paragraphe 5(3) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1995, ch. 40, art. 29










Duties of Chairperson of Board



(3) The Chairperson of the Board is the chief executive officer of the Board and shall apportion work among its members.









(3) Le président du Conseil en est le premier dirigeant; à ce titre, il en assure la direction et répartit les affaires et le travail entre les membres.



Fonctions du président du Conseil










Duties of Chairperson of Tribunal



(4) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall apportion work among its members.









(4) Le président de la Commission répartit les affaires et le travail entre les membres.



Fonctions du président de la Commission










1995, c. 40, s. 30; 2003, c. 22, par. 224(i)(E)



451. Subsection 6(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









451. Le paragraphe 6(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1995, ch. 40, art. 30, 2003, ch. 22, al. 224i)(A)










Staff and facilities



(4) The Minister may provide the Board with any officers and employees from within the federal public administration and any facilities and professional advisers that are necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the Board.









(4) Le ministre peut mettre à la disposition du Conseil les cadres et agents de l’administration publique fédérale, les conseillers techniques et professionnels, ainsi que les installations et fournitures nécessaires au bon fonctionnement du Conseil.



Personnel et installations








R.S., c. 47 (4th Supp.)



Canadian International Trade Tribunal Act









Loi sur le Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur



L.R., ch. 47 (4e suppl.)










1999, c. 12, par. 61(a)(E)



452. Section 7 of the Canadian International Trade Tribunal Act is replaced by the following:









452. L’article 7 de la Loi sur le Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, al. 61a)(A)










Duties of Chairperson



7. The Chairperson has supervision over and direction of the work of the Tribunal including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing,








(a) the allocation of work among the members and the assignment of members to sit at, and to preside at, hearings of the Tribunal; and








(b) generally, the conduct of the work of the Tribunal and the management of its internal affairs.









7. Le président assure la direction du Tribunal et en contrôle les activités, notamment en ce qui a trait à la répartition des tâches et des séances entre les membres, à la désignation des présidents de séance, à la conduite des travaux du Tribunal et à la gestion de ses affaires internes.



Président










1999, c. 12, par. 61(d)(E)



453. The heading before section 14 and sections 14 and 15 of the Act are repealed.









453. L’intertitre précédant l’article 14 et les articles 14 et 15 de la même loi sont abrogés.



1999, ch. 12, al. 61d)(A)










1994, c. 47, s. 43



454. Subsection 44.1(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:









454. Le paragraphe 44.1(1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1994, ch. 47, art. 43










Information to be disclosed



44.1 (1) Where information is provided to the Tribunal for the purposes of proceedings before the Tribunal under the Special Import Measures Act in respect of goods imported from a NAFTA country, other than proceedings under section 33, subsection 34(1), section 35 or subsection 45(1) or 61(1) of that Act, the Tribunal shall, on request, provide the government of that country with copies of any such information that is in documentary form or in any other form in which it may be readily and accurately copied, unless the information is information to which subsection 45(1) of this Act or subsection 84(1) of that Act applies.









44.1 (1) Dans le cas de procédures engagées en vertu de la Loi sur les mesures spéciales d’importation relativement à des marchandises importées d’un pays ALÉNA, et ce à l’exclusion des procédures prévues à l’article 33, au paragraphe 34(1), à l’article 35 ou aux paragraphes 45(1) ou 61(1) de cette loi, le Tribunal fait parvenir au gouvernement de ce pays, à sa demande, copie de tout renseignement fourni au Tribunal sous forme documentaire ou sous toute autre forme permettant de le reproduire facilement et fidèlement, sauf s’il s’agit d’un renseignement visé au paragraphe 84(1) de cette loi ou au paragraphe 45(1) de la présente loi.



Communication des renseignements










1999, c. 12, s. 59(1)



455. (1) The portion of subsection 45(3.1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









455. (1) Le passage du paragraphe 45(3.1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, par. 59(1)










Disclosure to Tribunal’s experts



(3.1) Despite subsection (1), the Tribunal may disclose information to which that subsection applies to an expert engaged to advise or assist the Tribunal for use, despite any other Act or law, by the expert only in proceedings before the Tribunal under the Special Import Measures Act or this Act, subject to any conditions that the Tribunal considers reasonably necessary or desirable to ensure that the information will not, without the written consent of the person who provided the information to the Tribunal, be disclosed by the expert to any person in any manner that is calculated or likely to make it available to









(3.1) Malgré le paragraphe (1), les renseignements auxquels ce paragraphe s’applique peuvent être communiqués par le Tribunal à l’expert dont les services sont retenus afin de l’aider ou de le conseiller dans le cadre de la procédure engagée devant lui au titre de la Loi sur les mesures spéciales d’importation ou au titre de la présente loi et pour laquelle ils ont été fournis; malgré toute autre loi ou règle de droit, les renseignements ne peuvent être utilisés par l’expert que dans le cadre de cette procé-dure, sous réserve des conditions que le Tribu-nal juge indiquées pour empêcher que les renseignements ne soient divulgués, sans le consentement écrit de la personne qui les a fournis, de manière à pouvoir être utilisés par :



Communication à l’expert du Tribunal












(2) Subsection 45(5) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the following after paragraph (b):









(2) Le paragraphe 45(5) de la même loi est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa b), de ce qui suit :














(b.1) persons engaged under subsection 11(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act to advise or assist the Tribunal; and









b.1) les personnes dont les services sont retenus en vertu du paragraphe 11(2) de la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs afin d’aider ou de conseiller le Tribunal;












1999, c. 12, s. 60; 2005, c. 38, par. 55(c)



456. Paragraph 49(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:









456. L’alinéa 49b) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1999, ch. 12, art. 60; 2005, ch. 38, al. 55c)












(b) the President indicates to the Tribunal in writing that subsection 84(1) of the Special Import Measures Act applies to information or material filed with it under paragraph 37(a) or 38(3)(b) or subsection 76.03(9) of that Act,









b) ceux qui sont déposés auprès du Tribunal conformément aux alinéas 37a) ou 38(3)b) ou au paragraphe 76.03(9) de la Loi sur les mesures spéciales d’importation et à propos desquels le président de l’Agence des services frontaliers du Canada a indiqué par écrit au Tribunal qu’ils faisaient l’objet de l’application du paragraphe 84(1) de cette loi.












Application



457. Section 7, subsections 44.1(1) and 45(3.1) and (5) and paragraph 49(b) of the Act, as enacted or amended by sections 452 and 454 to 456, apply to goods of a NAFTA country as defined in subsection 2(2) of that Act.









457. L’article 7, les paragraphes 44.1(1) et 45(3.1) et (5) et l’alinéa 49b) de la même loi, dans leur version édictée ou modifiée par les articles 452 et 454 à 456, s’appliquent aux marchandises d’un pays ALÉNA, au sens du paragraphe 2(2) de cette loi.



Application








R.S., c. 1 (5th Supp.)



Income Tax Act









Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu



L.R., ch. 1 (5e suppl.)












458. Subparagraph 241(4)(d)(xii) of the Income Tax Act is replaced by the following:









458. Le sous-alinéa 241(4)d)(xii) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu est remplacé par ce qui suit :














(xii) to a member of the Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board or an official of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada solely for the purposes of administering sections 32 to 33.2 of the Cultural Property Export and Import Act,









(xii) à un membre de la Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels ou à un fonctionnaire du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs, mais uniquement en vue de l’application des articles 32 à 33.2 de la Loi sur l’exportation et l’importation de biens culturels,










1991, c. 30



Public Sector Compensation Act









Loi sur la rémunération du secteur public



1991, ch. 30












459. Schedule I to the Public Sector Compensation Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order under the heading ‘‘OTHER PORTIONS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE”:









459. L’annexe I de la Loi sur la rémunération du secteur public est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, sous l’intertitre « ADMINISTRATIONS FÉDÉRALES », de ce qui suit :














Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada






Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs









Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs






Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada










1992, c. 33



Status of the Artist Act









Loi sur le statut de l’artiste



1992, ch. 33










2012, c. 19, s. 538



460. Subsection 19(2) of the Status of the Artist Act is replaced by the following:









460. Le paragraphe 19(2) de la Loi sur le statut de l’artiste est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 19, art. 538










Consultation



(2) In order to ensure that the purpose of this Part is achieved, the members of the Board may, in respect of any matter before it, consult with other members or with employees of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada.









(2) Afin d’assurer la réalisation de l’objet de la présente partie, les membres peuvent, dans le cadre des affaires dont le Conseil est saisi, consulter d’autres membres, de même que le personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs.



Consultation










2012, c. 19, s. 556(5)



461. Subsection 53(4) of the Act is replaced by the following:









461. Le paragraphe 53(4) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 19, par. 556(5)










Board’s duty and power



(4) If the Board is of the opinion that the complaint must be heard, it may appoint a member who was never seized of the matter, or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada, to assist the parties to settle it and, if the matter is not settled within a period that the Board considers reasonable in the circumstances, or if the Board decides not to appoint a person to assist the parties to settle it, the Board shall hear and determine the complaint.









(4) Le Conseil peut, après avoir statué sur la recevabilité de la plainte, l’instruire lui-même ou charger un membre qui n’a pas été saisi de l’affaire ou l’un des membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs d’aider les parties à régler le point en litige; il l’instruit toutefois lui-même si les parties ne sont pas parvenues à s’entendre dans le délai qu’il juge raisonnable en l’espèce.



Pouvoirs du Conseil










2012, c. 19, s. 563



462. Section 65 of the Act is replaced by the following:









462. L’article 65 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 19, art. 563










Persons not required to give evidence



65. (1) No member of the Board or person appointed by the Board or the Minister under this Part is required to give evidence in any civil action, suit or other proceeding, respecting information obtained in the discharge of their duties under this Part.









65. (1) Les membres du Conseil ainsi que toutes les personnes nommées par le Conseil ou le ministre au titre de la présente partie ne sont pas tenus de déposer en justice relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice des fonctions que leur confère la présente partie.



Dépositions en justice










Chief Administrator and employees not required to give evidence



(2) Neither the Chief Administrator nor an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada shall be required to give evidence in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the discharge of their duties in providing services to the Board.









(2) L’administrateur en chef et les membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs ne sont pas tenus de déposer en justice relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice de leurs fonctions dans le cadre de la prestation de services au Conseil.



Administrateur en chef et personnel








1995, c. 44



Employment Equity Act









Loi sur l’équité en matière d’emploi



1995, ch. 44










1998, c. 9, s. 39(1)



463. Subsection 28(7) of the Employment Equity Act is repealed.









463. Le paragraphe 28(7) de la Loi sur l’équité en matière d’emploi est abrogé.



1998, ch. 9, par. 39(1)








2001, c. 29



Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada Act









Loi sur le Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada



2001, ch. 29












464. The portion of subsection 5(1) of the Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









464. Le passage du paragraphe 5(1) de la Loi sur le Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Duties of Chairperson



5. (1) The Chairperson has supervision over, and direction of, the work of the Tribunal, including









5. (1) Le président assure la direction du Tribunal et en contrôle les activités. Il est notamment chargé :



Fonctions du président










2003, c. 22, par. 225(z.26)(E)



465. Section 10 of the Act is repealed.









465. L’article 10 de la même loi est abrogé.



2003, ch. 22, al. 225z.26)(A)








2005, c. 34; 2013, c. 40, s. 205



Department of Employment and Social Development Act









Loi sur le ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social



2005, ch. 34; 2013, ch. 40, art. 205












466. The Department of Employment and Social Development Act is amended by adding the following after section 60:









466. La Loi sur le ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social est modifiée par adjonction, après l’article 60, de ce qui suit :












Services and facilities



60.1 (1) The Minister may provide the Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada with any administrative services and facilities that are necessary to enable him or her to provide support services and facilities to the Tribunal.









60.1 (1) Le ministre peut fournir à l’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs les services administratifs et installations qui sont nécessaires pour que celui-ci puisse à son tour fournir des services d’appui et des installations au Tribunal.



Services et installations










Spending authority



(2) The Minister may spend revenues obtained from the provision of services and facilities to the Chief Administrator, in the fiscal year in which they are received or, unless an appropriation Act provides otherwise, in the next fiscal year.









(2) Le ministre peut dépenser les recettes provenant de la fourniture de services administratifs et d’installations à l’administrateur en chef qu’il a reçues au cours d’un exercice pendant cet exercice ou, sauf disposition contraire d’une loi de crédits, pendant l’exercice suivant.



Dépenses










2012, c. 19, s. 224



467. Section 63 of the Act is replaced by the following:









467. L’article 63 de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2012, ch. 19, art. 224










Expenses and allowances



63. (1) Any party who is required to attend a hearing may, if the Chairperson in any particular case for special reasons considers it warranted, be reimbursed for their travel or living expenses up to the amounts determined by the Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada, or be paid any allowance, including compensation for lost remuneration, in accordance with the rates fixed by that Chief Administrator.









63. (1) Si le président du Tribunal estime que des raisons spéciales le justifient dans un cas particulier, la partie tenue de se présenter à une audience peut se faire rembourser ses frais de déplacement et de séjour, jusqu’à concurrence des montants fixés par l’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs, ou recevoir toute indemnité, y compris une indemnité pour perte de rémunération, selon les taux fixés par ce dernier.



Frais et indemnités










Payments



(2) Any amount to be paid under subsection (1) may be paid out of moneys appropriated by Parliament for the expenditures of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada.









(2) Toute somme à verser au titre du paragraphe (1) peut être prélevée sur les crédits affectés par le Parlement pour les dépenses du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs.



Paiements








2005, c. 46



Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act









Loi sur la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles



2005, ch. 46










2006, c. 9, s. 201



468. Section 20.8 of the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act is repealed.









468. L’article 20.8 de la Loi sur la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles est abrogé.



2006, ch. 9, art. 201








2008, c. 22



Specific Claims Tribunal Act









Loi sur le Tribunal des revendications particulières



2008, ch. 22












469. Section 10 of the Specific Claims Tribunal Act and the heading before it are repealed.









469. L’article 10 de la Loi sur le Tribunal des revendications particulières et l’intertitre le précédant sont abrogés.














470. The portion of subsection 12(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









470. Le passage du paragraphe 12(1) de la même loi précédant l’alinéa a) est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Rules of the Tribunal



12. (1) A committee of no more than six Tribunal members, appointed by the Chairperson, may make general rules for carrying out the work of the Tribunal and the management of its internal affairs, as well as rules governing its practice and procedures, including rules governing









12. (1) Un comité formé d’au plus six membres du Tribunal nommés par le président peut établir des règles d’application générale concernant l’accomplissement des travaux du Tribunal et la gestion de ses affaires internes ainsi que des règles de procédure pour régir ses activités, notamment en ce qui concerne :



Règles du Tribunal








2013, c. 40



Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2









Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013



2013, ch. 40












471. (1) Section 365 of the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2 is amended by replacing the section 13 that it enacts with the following:









471. (1) L’article 365 de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013 est modifié par remplacement de l’article 13 qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Head office



13. The Board’s head office is to be in the National Capital Region as it is described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.









13. Le siège de la Commission est fixé dans la région de la capitale nationale, délimitée à l’annexe de la Loi sur la capitale nationale.



Siège












(2) Section 365 of the Act is amended by replacing the section 23 that it enacts with the following:









(2) L’article 365 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’article 23 qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












General power to assist parties



23. The Board or a member of the Board or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada who is authorized by the Board may, if the parties agree, assist the parties in resolving any issues in dispute at any stage of a proceeding and by any means that the Board considers appropriate, without prejudice to the Board’s power to determine issues that have not been settled.









23. La Commission ou l’un de ses commissaires — ou un membre du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs autorisé par la Commission — peut, en tout état de cause et avec le consentement des parties, aider celles-ci à régler les questions en litige de la façon que la Commission juge indiquée sans qu’il soit porté atteinte à la compétence de cette dernière de trancher les questions qui n’auront pas été réglées.



Pouvoir général d’aider les parties












(3) Section 365 of the Act is amended by replacing the portion of section 25 before paragraph (a) that it enacts with the following:









(3) L’article 365 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement du passage de l’article 25 précédant l’alinéa a) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Chairperson’s duties



25. The Chairperson has supervision over and direction of the Board’s work, including









25. Le président assure la direction de la Commission et en contrôle les activités, notamment en ce qui a trait :



Attributions












(4) Section 365 of the Act is amended by replacing the heading before section 28 and sections 28 to 30 that it enacts with the following:









(4) L’article 365 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’intertitre précédant l’article 28 et des articles 28 à 30 qui y sont édictés par ce qui suit :












Experts









Experts












Experts and advisors



30. The Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada may engage on a temporary basis the services of mediators and other experts to assist the Board in an advisory capacity and, subject to the Governor in Council’s approval, fix their remuneration.









30. L’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs peut retenir temporairement les services de médiateurs et d’autres experts chargés d’assister la Commission à titre consultatif et, sous réserve de l’agrément du gouverneur en conseil, fixer leur rémunération.



Assistance technique












(5) Section 365 of the Act is amended by replacing the section 31 that it enacts with the following:









(5) L’article 365 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’article 31 qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Board members and experts not compellable



31. (1) A member of the Board or any person who is engaged under section 30 is not competent or compellable to appear as a witness in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the exercise of their powers or the performance of their duties and functions.









31. (1) Les commissaires et les personnes dont les services sont retenus en vertu de l’article 30 ne sont pas habiles à témoigner ni contraignables au civil relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice de leurs attributions.



Commissaires et experts non contraignables










Chief Administrator and employees not compellable



(2) The Chief Administrator or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada is not competent or compellable to appear as a witness in any civil action, suit or other proceeding respecting information obtained in the exercise of their powers or the performance of their duties and functions in providing services to the Board.









(2) L’administrateur en chef et les membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs ne sont pas habiles à témoigner ni contraignables au civil relativement à des renseignements obtenus dans l’exercice de leurs attributions dans le cadre de la prestation de services à la Commission.



Administrateur en chef et personnel non contraignables












(6) Section 365 of the Act is amended by replacing the section 33 that it enacts with the following:









(6) L’article 365 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’article 33 qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Immunity from proceedings — Board members, experts and others



33. (1) No criminal or civil proceedings lie against a member of the Board, any person who is engaged under section 30 or any person who is acting on the Board’s behalf for anything done — or omitted to be done — or reported or said by that member or that person in good faith in the course of the exercise or performance or purported exercise or performance of their powers, duties or functions.









33. (1) Les commissaires, les personnes dont les services sont retenus en vertu de l’article 30 et les personnes agissant au nom de la Commission bénéficient de l’immunité civile et pénale pour les actes accomplis ou omis, les rapports ou comptes rendus établis et les paroles prononcées de bonne foi dans l’exercice effectif ou censé tel de leurs attributions.



Immunité civile et pénale — commissaires, experts et autres










Immunity from proceedings — Chief Administrator and employees



(2) No criminal or civil proceedings lie against the Chief Administrator or an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada for anything done — or omitted to be done — or reported or said by that person in good faith in the course of the exercise or performance or purported exercise or perform-ance of their powers, duties or functions in providing services to the Board.









(2) L’administrateur en chef et les membres du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs bénéficient de l’immunité civile et pénale pour les actes accomplis ou omis, les rapports ou comptes rendus établis et les paroles prononcées de bonne foi dans l’exercice effectif ou censé tel de leurs attributions dans le cadre de la prestation de services à la Commission.



Immunité civile et pénale — administrateur en chef et personnel












472. Subsection 366(2) of the Act is amended by replacing the paragraph 2(3)(a) that it enacts with the following:









472. Le paragraphe 366(2) de la même loi est modifié par remplacement de l’alinéa 2(3)a) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :














(a) the person is engaged under section 30 of the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board Act; or









a) la personne dont les services sont retenus en vertu de l’article 30 de la Loi sur la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique;














473. Subsection 404(2) of the Act is repealed.









473. Le paragraphe 404(2) de la même loi est abrogé.














474. Section 413 of the Act is amended by replacing the subsection 111(2) that it enacts with the following:









474. L’article 413 de la même loi est modifié par remplacement du paragraphe 111(2) qui y est édicté par ce qui suit :












Meaning of “deputy head”



(2) For the purposes of this Part, “deputy head” includes a Commissioner appointed under subsection 4(5).









(2) Pour l’application de la présente partie, les commissaires nommés aux termes du paragraphe 4(5) sont considérés comme des administrateurs généraux.



Administrateur général












475. Section 447 of the Act is repealed.









475. L’article 447 de la même loi est abrogé.














476. Section 452 of the Act is repealed.









476. L’article 452 de la même loi est abrogé.














477. Section 455 of the Act is repealed.









477. L’article 455 de la même loi est abrogé.














478. Section 458 of the Act is repealed.









478. L’article 458 de la même loi est abrogé.














479. Section 460 of the Act is repealed.









479. L’article 460 de la même loi est abrogé.












Coordinating Amendments









Dispositions de coordination












2012, c. 24



480. (1) In this section, “other Act” means the Safe Food for Canadians Act.









480. (1) Au présent article, « autre loi » s’entend de la Loi sur la salubrité des aliments au Canada.



2012, ch. 24












(2) If section 78 of the other Act comes into force before section 376 of this Act, on the later of the day on which that section 78 comes into force and the day on which this Act receives royal assent, sections 449 to 451 of this Act are repealed.









(2) Si l’article 78 de l’autre loi entre en vigueur avant l’article 376 de la présente loi, à la date d’entrée en vigueur de cet article 78 ou à la date de sanction de la présente loi, la dernière en date étant à retenir, les articles 449 à 451 de la présente loi sont abrogés.














(3) If section 78 of the other Act and section 376 of this Act come into force on the same day, then that section 78 is deemed to have come into force before that section 376.









(3) Si l’entrée en vigueur de l’article 78 de l’autre loi et celle de l’article 376 de la présente loi sont concomitantes, cet article 78 est réputé être entré en vigueur avant cet article 376.














(4) On the first day on which both section 376 of this Act and section 102 of the other Act are in force,






(a) subsection 33(1) of the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary Penalties Act is replaced by the following:









(4) Dès le premier jour où l’article 376 de la présente loi et l’article 102 de l’autre loi sont tous deux en vigueur :






a) le paragraphe 33(1) de la Loi sur les sanctions administratives pécuniaires en matière d’agriculture et d’agroalimentaire est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Duties of Chairperson



33. (1) The Chairperson apportions work among the Tribunal’s members.








(b) the heading before section 35 and sections 35 and 36 of the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary Penalties Act are repealed.









33. (1) Le président de la Commission répartit les tâches entre les membres.



Fonctions du président




b) l’intertitre précédant l’article 35 et les articles 35 et 36 de la Loi sur les sanctions administratives pécuniaires en matière d’agriculture et d’agroalimentaire sont abrogés.














2013, c. 40



481. (1) In this section, “other Act” means the Economic Action Plan 2013 Act, No. 2.









481. (1) Au présent article, « autre loi » s’entend de la Loi no 2 sur le plan d’action économique de 2013.



2013, ch. 40












(2) On the first day on which both section 376 of this Act and subsection 4(1) of the Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board Act, as enacted by section 365 of the other Act, are in force,






(a) the schedule to the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:









(2) Dès le premier jour où l’article 376 de la présente loi et le paragraphe 4(1) de la Loi sur la Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique, édictée par l’article 365 de l’autre loi, sont tous deux en vigueur :






a) l’annexe de la Loi sur le Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs est modifiée par adjonction, selon l’ordre alphabétique, de ce qui suit :














Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board






Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique






(b) section 81 of the Parliamentary Employment and Staff Relations Act is replaced by the following:









Commission des relations de travail et de l’emploi dans la fonction publique






Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board






b) l’article 81 de la Loi sur les relations de travail au Parlement est remplacé par ce qui suit :












Facilities and staff



81. The Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada shall provide an arbitrator appointed under section 49 and an adjudicator with the staff, the quarters and the other facilities that are necessary to enable the arbitrator or adjudicator to carry out their respective functions under this Part.








(c) section 83 of the Parliamentary Employment and Staff Relations Act and the heading before it are repealed;








(d) paragraph (h) of the definition “employee” in subsection 2(1) of the Public Service Labour Relations Act is replaced by the following:









81. L’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs fournit aux arbitres nommés en vertu de l’article 49 et aux arbitres des griefs le personnel, les locaux et les autres installations qui sont nécessaires à l’exercice de leurs fonctions.



Installations et personnel




c) l’article 83 de la Loi sur les relations de travail au Parlement et l’intertitre le précédant sont abrogés;








d) l’alinéa h) de la définition de « fonctionnaire », au paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique, est remplacé par ce qui suit :
















(h) an employee of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada who provides any of the following services exclusively to the Board:






(i) mediation and dispute resolution serv-ices,






(ii) legal services,






(iii) advisory services relating to the Board’s exercise of its powers and per- formance of its duties and functions;






(e) section 11 of the Public Service Labour Relations Act is renumbered as subsection 11(1) and is amended by adding the following:









h) qui est membre du personnel du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs et fournit, exclusivement à la Commission, l’un ou l’autre des services suivants :






(i) des services de médiation ou de résolution de conflits,






(ii) des services juridiques,






(iii) des conseils portant sur l’exercice des attributions de celle-ci;






e) l’article 11 de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique devient le paragraphe 11(1) et est modifié par adjonction de ce qui suit :












Facilities and administrative support



(2) The Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada is to provide facilities and administrative support to the National Joint Council.








(f) the definition “employee” in subsection 206(1) of the Public Service Labour Relations Act is replaced by the following:









(2) L’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs fournit des installations et des services de soutien administratif au Conseil national mixte.



Installations et soutien administratif




f) la définition de « fonctionnaire », au paragraphe 206(1) de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique, est remplacée par ce qui suit :














“employee”« fonction­naire »



“employee” has the meaning that would be assigned by the definition “employee” in subsection 2(1) if that definition were read without reference to paragraphs (e), (h) and (i) and without reference to the words “except in Part 2”.








(g) section 249 of the Public Service Labour Relations Act is replaced by the following:









« fonctionnaire » S’entend au sens de la définition de ce terme au paragraphe 2(1), compte non tenu des exceptions prévues aux alinéas e), h) et i) de celle-ci et des mots « sauf à la partie 2 ».



« fonctionnaire »“employee”




g) l’article 249 de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique est remplacé par ce qui suit :














Facilities and human resources



249. The Chief Administrator of the Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada must provide members of arbitration boards, members of public interest commissions, me-diators, adjudicators and persons seized of referrals under subsection 182(1) with the facilities and human resources necessary to enable them to carry out their functions under this Act.









249. L’administrateur en chef du Service canadien d’appui aux tribunaux administratifs fournit aux commissions de l’intérêt public, aux conseils d’arbitrage, aux arbitres de griefs, aux médiateurs et aux personnes saisies d’un renvoi aux termes du paragraphe 182(1) les installations et les ressources humaines qui sont nécessaires à l’accomplissement de leurs fonctions en application de la présente loi.



Installations et ressources humaines












(3) On the first day on which both section 376 of this Act and section 15 of the Public Service Labour Relations Act, as enacted by section 367 of the other Act, are in force, that section 15 is repealed.









(3) Dès le premier jour où l’article 376 de la présente loi et l’article 15 de la Loi sur les relations de travail dans la fonction publique, dans sa version édictée par l’article 367 de l’autre loi, sont tous deux en vigueur, cet article 15 est abrogé.












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



482. This Division, except sections 471 to 481, comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









482. La présente section, exception faite des articles 471 à 481, entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret












Division 30









Section 30












Apprentice Loans Act









Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis












Enactment of Act









Édiction de la loi












Enactment



483. The Apprentice Loans Act is enacted as follows:









483. Est édictée la Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis, dont le texte suit :



Édiction












An Act respecting the making of loans to apprentices









Loi portant octroi de prêts aux apprentis












SHORT TITLE









TITRE ABRÉGÉ












Short title



1. This Act may be cited as the Apprentice Loans Act.









1. Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis.



Titre abrégé










INTERPRETATION









DÉFINITIONS












Definitions



2. (1) The following definitions apply in this Act.




“eligible trade”« métier admissible »



“eligible trade” means a trade listed in the schedule to the regulations.




“Minister”« ministre »



“Minister” means the Minister of Employment and Social Development.




“technical training provider”« fournisseur de formation technique »



“technical training provider” means an institution that is approved by a province for the purpose of providing technical training.









2. (1) Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente loi.



Définitions




« fournisseur de formation technique » Établissement d’enseignement agréé par une province pour offrir une formation technique. 



« fournisseur de formation technique »“technical training provider”




« métier admissible » Métier figurant à l’annexe des règlements.



« métier admissible »“eligible trade”




« ministre » Le ministre de l’Emploi et du Développement social.



« ministre »“Minister”










Other definitions



(2) In this Act, the words and expressions “apprentice”, “apprentice loan”, “borrower”, “eligible apprentice”, “technical training” and “technical training period” have the meanings assigned by the regulations.









(2) Dans la présente loi, les termes « apprenti », « apprenti admissible », « emprunteur », « formation technique », « période de formation technique » et « prêt aux apprentis » s’entendent au sens des règlements.



Autres définitions










PURPOSE









OBJET DE LA LOI












Purpose



3. The purpose of this Act is to assist eligible apprentices by making loans available to them.









3. La présente loi a pour objet d’aider les apprentis admissibles au moyen de prêts.



Objet










APPRENTICE LOANS









PRÊTS AUX APPRENTIS












Agreements with eligible apprentices



4. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister, or any person authorized by order of the Minister to act on the Minister’s behalf, may enter into an agreement with any eligible apprentice who is registered in an eligible trade for the purpose of making an apprentice loan.









4. (1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), le ministre, ou toute personne qu’il autorise par arrêté à agir en son nom, peut conclure un accord avec un apprenti admissible qui est inscrit dans un métier admissible en vue de lui octroyer un prêt.



Accord avec un apprenti admissible










Financial terms and conditions



(2) Any terms and conditions in the agreement that could have a financial impact on Her Majesty in right of Canada are subject to approval by the Governor in Council, on the recommendation of the Minister with the concurrence of the Minister of Finance.









(2) Les conditions et modalités de l’accord pouvant avoir une incidence financière pour Sa Majesté du chef du Canada doivent être approuvées au préalable par le gouverneur en conseil sur la recommandation du ministre, à laquelle doit souscrire le ministre des Finances.



Conditions et modalités










Agreements or arrangements with service providers



5. (1) The Minister may enter into an agreement or arrangement with any corporation incorporated under the laws of Canada or a province and carrying on business in Canada (in this section referred to as a “service provider”), respecting the administration of apprentice loans made by the Minister. An agreement may provide for, but is not limited to, any matter referred to in the regulations.









5. (1) Le ministre peut conclure avec une personne morale constituée par une loi fédérale ou provinciale faisant affaire au Canada (ci-après « fournisseur de services ») un accord ou un arrangement concernant l’administration de prêts aux apprentis qu’il octroie aux apprentis admissibles. L’accord peut notamment porter sur toute question mentionnée dans les règlements.



Accord ou arrangement avec un fournisseur de services










Receipt and Deposit of Public Money Regulations, 1997



(2) Despite section 3 of the Receipt and Deposit of Public Money Regulations, 1997, the portion of the following money that is public money and is collected or received electronically by a service provider that has entered into an agreement under subsection (1) must be paid to the credit of the Receiver General by depositing it, within two business days after the day on which it is collected or received, in an account established under subsection 17(2) of the Financial Administration Act:








(a) money collected or received as repayment of an apprentice loan or as payment of interest owing on that loan; and








(b) interest received by the service provider on the money referred to in paragraph (a).









(2) Malgré l’article 3 du Règlement de 1997 sur la réception et le dépôt des fonds publics, le versement au crédit du receveur général des sommes ci-après qui constituent des fonds publics perçus ou reçus par voie électronique par un fournisseur de services avec lequel un accord a été conclu en vertu du paragraphe (1) se fait par le dépôt de celles-ci, au plus tard deux jours ouvrables après leur perception ou réception, dans un compte ouvert en vertu du paragraphe 17(2) de la Loi sur la gestion des finances publiques :



Règlement de 1997 sur la réception et le dépôt des fonds publics




a) les fonds perçus ou reçus pour le remboursement d’un prêt aux apprentis ou le paiement d’intérêts afférents à un tel prêt;








b) les intérêts que le fournisseur de services a reçus sur les sommes visées à l’alinéa a).














Definition of “business day”



(3) In this section, “business day” means a day other than a Saturday or a holiday.









(3) Pour l’application du présent article, « jour ouvrable » s’entend d’un jour qui n’est ni un samedi ni un jour férié.



Définition de « jour ouvrable »










Suspension or denial of apprentice loans



6. The Minister may suspend or deny the making of apprentice loans to all those who are eligible apprentices participating in technical training provided by a technical training provid-er if the Minister is satisfied that there are compelling reasons to believe that the making of the apprentice loans would








(a) facilitate the commission by the technical training provider of an offence under this Act or any other Act of Parliament; or








(b) expose the eligible apprentices or Her Majesty in right of Canada to significant financial risk.









6. Le ministre peut refuser ou suspendre l’octroi de prêts à l’ensemble des apprentis admissibles participant à une formation technique offerte par un fournisseur de formation technique s’il est convaincu qu’il existe des motifs impérieux de croire qu’un tel octroi faciliterait la perpétration par ce fournisseur d’une infraction à la présente loi ou à toute autre loi fédérale ou exposerait ces apprentis ou Sa Majesté du chef du Canada à un risque financier important.



Refus ou suspension de prêts aux apprentis










SPECIAL PAYMENTS









PAIEMENTS SPÉCIAUX












Special payments



7. The Minister may pay a province the amount that is determined in accordance with the regulations if








(a) the Minister determines that apprentices registered with the province are unable to enter into agreements for apprentice loans under section 4;








(b) the province has in place a program providing for financial assistance to apprentices; and








(c) the Minister considers that the purpose of the program is substantially similar to the purpose of this Act.









7. Le ministre peut verser à une province une somme déterminée conformément aux règlements si les conditions ci-après sont réunies :



Paiements spéciaux




a) le ministre établit que les apprentis inscrits auprès de cette province ne sont pas en mesure de conclure un accord visé à l’article 4;








b) cette province a déjà un programme d’aide financière destiné aux apprentis;








c) de l’avis du ministre, l’objet de ce programme est essentiellement semblable à celui de la présente loi.














INTEREST-FREE AND DEFERRAL PERIODS









PÉRIODES SANS INTÉRÊT NI REMBOURSEMENT












Interest-free period



8. (1) Subject to the regulations, no interest is payable by a borrower on an apprentice loan for the interest-free period that is set out in the regulations.









8. (1) Sous réserve des règlements, les prêts aux apprentis ne portent pas intérêt pour l’emprunteur jusqu’à la fin de la période prévue par règlement.



Exemption de paiement










Deferral period



(2) No amount on account of principal or interest in respect of an apprentice loan is required to be paid by the borrower until the end of the prescribed period.









(2) Le paiement du principal ou des intérêts d’un prêt aux apprentis peut être différé pour la période réglementaire.



Report de paiement










DEATH OR DISABILITY OF BORROWER









DÉCÈS OU INVALIDITÉ DE L’EMPRUNTEUR












Death of borrower



9. All obligations of a borrower in respect of an apprentice loan terminate if the borrower dies.









9. Les obligations de l’emprunteur relativement à un prêt aux apprentis s’éteignent lorsque celui-ci décède.



Cas de décès










Severe permanent disability



10. (1) All obligations of a borrower in respect of an apprentice loan terminate if the Minister is satisfied, on the basis of information specified by the Minister and provided by or on behalf of the borrower, that the borrower, by reason of the borrower’s severe permanent disability, is unable to repay the loan and will never be able to repay it.









10. (1) Les obligations de l’emprunteur relatives à un prêt aux apprentis s’éteignent lorsque, sur communication par celui-ci — ou en son nom — des renseignements qu’il détermine, le ministre est convaincu que ce dernier, en raison d’une invalidité grave et permanente, ne peut et ne pourra jamais rembourser son prêt.



Invalidité grave et permanente










Definition of “severe permanent disability”



(2) In this section, the expression “severe permanent disability” has the meaning assigned by the regulations.









(2) Au présent article, l’expression « invalidité grave et permanente » s’entend au sens des règlements.



Définition de « invalidité grave et permanente »










MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF OUTSTANDING APPRENTICE LOANS









MAXIMUM ADMISSIBLE DES PRÊTS AUX APPRENTIS IMPAYÉS












Maximum amount



11. The aggregate amount of apprentice loans made under this Act that are outstanding may not exceed the prescribed amount.









11. Le montant total des prêts aux apprentis consentis sous le régime de la présente loi et impayés ne peut dépasser le montant réglementaire.



Maximum admissible










REGULATIONS









RÈGLEMENTS












Regulations



12. (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations








(a) defining the words and expressions referred to in subsections 2(2), 10(2) and 17(7);








(b) establishing a schedule that sets out a list of eligible trades, including eligible trades by province;








(c) prescribing the circumstances in which a borrower is or ceases to be an eligible apprentice;








(d) providing for the conditions to be met before a disbursement in respect of an apprentice loan may be made;








(e) prescribing the manner of determining the amount that may be paid to a province under section 7;








(f) prescribing the manner of determining the interest-free period referred to in subsection 8(1), including any conditions for continued eligibility for an interest-free period;








(g) prescribing the circumstances under which an apprentice loan may be denied to an eligible apprentice, or an interest-free period referred to in subsection 8(1) may be terminated by the Minister;








(h) prescribing the maximum amount of an apprentice loan that may be made to an eligible apprentice for each technical training period;








(i) prescribing the maximum period that may elapse after which, despite anything in this Act, the principal amount of an apprentice loan and interest on that amount begin to be payable by the borrower;








(j) prescribing the maximum number of technical training periods for which an apprentice is eligible to be advanced an apprentice loan;








(k) providing for the establishment and operation of a program to provide special interest-free or interest-reduced periods to borrowers or classes of borrowers, including the terms and conditions of the granting or termination of those special periods;








(l) providing for repayment of apprentice loans by borrowers or classes of borrowers on an income-contingent basis;








(m) prescribing information to be included in any form or document referred to in section 13 in addition to any information that is otherwise required under this Act to be included in the form or document;








(n) providing for the times referred to in paragraph 15(a);








(o) providing for the form and manner in which information referred to in paragraph 15(b) is to be provided;








(p) providing for the measures referred to in subsection 20(1);








(q) providing for the period after which the Minister may no longer take a measure referred to in paragraph (p);








(r) prescribing anything that, by this Act, is to be prescribed by the regulations; and








(s) generally, for carrying into effect the purposes and provisions of this Act.









12. (1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement :



Règlements




a) définir les termes et expressions mentionnés aux paragraphes 2(2), 10(2) et 17(7);








b) établir une annexe où figure la liste des métiers admissibles, notamment par province;








c) déterminer les circonstances dans lesquelles un emprunteur est un apprenti admissible ou cesse de l’être;








d) prévoir les conditions à remplir préalablement au versement du prêt aux apprentis;








e) prévoir le mode de détermination de la somme à verser à une province en application de l’article 7;








f) prévoir le mode de détermination de la période d’exemption du paiement des intérêts prévue au paragraphe 8(1) et notamment toute condition relative au maintien de l’admissibilité à cette exemption;








g) déterminer les cas justifiant l’annulation, par le ministre, de l’exemption du paiement d’intérêts prévue au paragraphe 8(1) ou justifiant le refus d’un prêt aux apprentis;








h) fixer le montant maximal d’un prêt aux apprentis qui peut être octroyé à un apprenti admissible pour chaque période de formation technique;








i) fixer, pour les prêts aux apprentis octroyés, la durée maximale de la période après laquelle, par dérogation aux autres dispositions de la présente loi, l’emprunteur doit commencer à payer le principal et les intérêts du prêt;








j) fixer le nombre maximal de périodes de formation technique à l’égard desquelles un apprenti est admissible à un prêt aux apprentis;








k) prévoir l’élaboration et la mise en oeuvre d’un programme d’exemptions totales ou partielles, pendant des périodes spéciales, pour le paiement d’intérêts par les emprunteurs ou par des catégories d’emprunteurs, en fixer les conditions et les modalités de cessation;








l) prévoir le remboursement des prêts aux apprentis par les emprunteurs ou par des catégories d’emprunteurs en fonction du revenu;








m) prévoir les renseignements qui doivent figurer dans les formulaires et documents mentionnés à l’article 13 en plus de tout autre renseignement devant par ailleurs y figurer sous le régime de la présente loi;








n) prévoir les délais visés à l’alinéa 15a);








o) prévoir les modalités de fourniture des renseignements mentionnées à l’alinéa 15b);








p) prévoir les mesures mentionnées au paragraphe 20(1);








q) prévoir la période après laquelle le ministre ne peut plus prendre une mesure visée à l’alinéa p);








r) prendre toute autre mesure d’ordre réglementaire prévue par la présente loi;








s) de façon générale, prendre toute autre mesure d’application de la présente loi.














Maximum aggregate amount of outstanding apprentice loans



(2) On the Minister’s recommendation with the Minister of Finance’s concurrence, the Governor in Council may make regulations, for the purposes of section 11,








(a) prescribing the aggregate amount of outstanding apprentice loans that may not be exceeded; and








(b) prescribing the apprentice loans that are to be considered for the purposes of determining, at a given time, the aggregate amount of outstanding apprentice loans.









(2) Pour l’application de l’article 11, le gouverneur en conseil peut par règlement, sur la recommandation du ministre à laquelle doit souscrire le ministre des Finances :



Montant total maximal des prêts aux apprentis impayés




a) prévoir le montant total maximal des prêts aux apprentis impayés;








b) prévoir les prêts aux apprentis à prendre en compte pour calculer, à un moment donné, le montant total des prêts aux apprentis impayés.














Eligible trades



(3) The Minister may, by regulation, amend the schedule to the regulations by adding a trade to it or removing a trade from it.









(3) Le ministre peut, par règlement, modifier l’annexe des règlements pour ajouter ou supprimer le nom d’un métier admissible.



Métier admissible










Externally produced material



(4) A regulation made under this section may incorporate by reference documents produced by a person or body other than the Minister, including by








(a) an organization established for the purpose of writing standards, including an organization accredited by the Standards Council of Canada;








(b) an industrial or trade organization; or








(c) a government.









(4) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement tout document produit par un organisme ou une personne autre que le ministre, notamment :



Documents externes




a) tout organisme de normalisation, entre autres tout organisme agréé par le Conseil canadien des normes;








b) toute organisation commerciale ou industrielle;








c) toute administration.














Reproduced or translated material



(5) A regulation made under this section may incorporate by reference documents that the Minister reproduces or translates from documents produced by a body or person other than the Minister








(a) with any adaptations of form and reference that will facilitate their incorporation into the regulation; or








(b) in a form that sets out only the parts of them that apply for the purposes of the regulation.









(5) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement tout document qui résulte de la reproduction ou de la traduction, par le ministre, d’un document produit par une autre personne ou un organisme et qui comporte, selon le cas :



Documents reproduits ou traduits




a) des adaptations quant à la forme et aux renvois destinées à en faciliter l’incorporation;








b) seulement les passages pertinents pour l’application du règlement.














Jointly produced documents



(6) A regulation made under this section may incorporate by reference documents that the Minister produces jointly with another government for the purpose of harmonizing the regulation with other laws.









(6) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement tout document produit conjointement par le ministre et toute autre administration en vue d’harmoniser le règlement avec d’autres règles de droit.



Documents produits conjointement










Internally produced standards



(7) A regulation made under this section may incorporate by reference technical or explanatory documents that the Minister produces, including








(a) specifications, classifications or other information of a technical nature; and








(b) test methods, procedures, operational standards, safety standards or performance standards of a technical nature.









(7) Peut être incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement tout document technique ou explicatif produit par le ministre, notamment :



Normes techniques dans des documents internes




a) des spécifications, classifications ou tout autre renseignement de nature technique;








b) des méthodes d’essai, procédures ou normes d’exploitation, de rendement ou de sécurité, de nature technique.














Incorporation as amended from time to time



(8) Documents may be incorporated by reference as amended from time to time.









(8) L’incorporation par renvoi peut viser le document avec ses modifications successives.



Portée de l’incorporation










For greater certainty



(9) Subsections (4) to (8) are for greater certainty and do not limit any authority to make regulations incorporating material by reference that exists apart from those subsections.









(9) Il est entendu que les paragraphes (4) à (8) n’ont pas pour objet d’empêcher la prise de règlements incorporant par renvoi des documents autres que ceux visés à ces paragraphes.



Interprétation










Accessibility



(10) The Minister must ensure that any document that is incorporated by reference in the regulation is accessible.









(10) Il incombe au ministre de veiller à ce que tout document incorporé par renvoi dans un règlement dont la mise en oeuvre ou l’exécution relèvent de lui soit accessible.



Accessibilité des documents










Defence



(11) A person is not liable to be found guilty of an offence for any contravention in respect of which a document that is incorporated by reference in the regulation is relevant unless, at the time of the alleged contravention, the document was accessible as required by subsection (10) or it was otherwise accessible to the person.









(11) Aucune déclaration de culpabilité ne peut découler d’une contravention faisant intervenir un document qui est incorporé par renvoi dans les règlements et qui se rapporte au fait reproché, sauf si, au moment de ce fait, le document était accessible en application du paragraphe (10) ou était autrement accessible à la personne en cause.



Aucune déclaration de culpabilité










Registration and publication not required



(12) For greater certainty, a document that is incorporated by reference in the regulation is not required to be transmitted for registration or published in the Canada Gazette under the Statutory Instruments Act by reason only that it is incorporated by reference.









(12) Il est entendu que les documents qui sont incorporés par renvoi dans les règlements n’ont pas à être transmis pour enregistrement ni à être publiés dans la Gazette du Canada, en application de la Loi sur les textes réglementaires, du seul fait de leur incorporation.



Enregistrement ou publication non requis










GENERAL









DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES












Forms and documents



13. A form or other document that is to be used in connection with making apprentice loans, or to be otherwise used for the effective operation of this Act, must be either determined by the Minister or approved by the Minister.









13. Les formulaires et autres documents à utiliser dans le cadre de l’octroi de prêts aux apprentis ou de nature à favoriser l’application de la présente loi sont, selon le cas, déterminés par le ministre ou assujettis à son approbation.



Formulaires et autres documents










Right of recovery by Minister



14. An apprentice loan that is made to a borrower who is not of full age and any interest on the loan are recoverable by the Minister from the borrower as though the borrower had been of full age at the time the agreement was entered into.









14. Le ministre peut recouvrer un prêt aux apprentis octroyé à un emprunteur mineur, ainsi que les intérêts afférents, comme si l’emprunteur avait été majeur au moment où l’accord a été conclu.



Droit de recouvrement par le ministre










Waiver



15. On application by an eligible apprentice or a borrower, the Minister may, to avoid undue hardship to the apprentice or borrower, waive








(a) a requirement of the regulations with respect to the times within which information in respect of the eligible apprentice or borrower is to be provided; or








(b) a requirement of the regulations with respect to the form or manner in which information in respect of the eligible apprentice or borrower is to be provided, or a requirement determined or approved by the Minister with respect to a form or other document in which such information is to be provided.









15. À la demande d’un apprenti admissible ou d’un emprunteur, le ministre peut, pour éviter qu’un préjudice injustifié ne soit causé à celui-ci, lever l’obligation pour l’apprenti admissible ou l’emprunteur de respecter :



Renonciation




a) les délais prévus par règlement en ce qui a trait à la fourniture de tout renseignement le concernant;








b) toute autre modalité prévue par règlement aux termes de laquelle les renseignements à son égard doivent être fournis ou toute exigence relative à un formulaire ou un document déterminée ou approuvée par le ministre pour la fourniture de ces renseignements.














Apprentice loan denied due to error



16. If the Minister is satisfied that, as a result of an error made in the administration of this Act or the regulations, a person was denied an apprentice loan to which the person would have been entitled, the Minister may take remedial action to place the person in the position that he or she would have been in under this Act had the error not been made.









16. S’il est convaincu qu’en raison d’une erreur commise dans le cadre de l’application de la présente loi ou des règlements une personne s’est vu refuser un prêt aux apprentis auquel elle aurait eu droit, le ministre peut prendre des mesures correctives pour la placer dans la situation où elle se retrouverait sous l’autorité de la présente loi si une erreur n’avait pas été commise.



Refus d’un prêt aux apprentis en raison d’une erreur










Limitation or prescription period



17. (1) Subject to this section, no action or proceedings may be taken to recover money owing under this Act after the end of the six-year period that begins on the day on which the money becomes due and payable.









17. (1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions du présent article, toute poursuite visant le recouvrement d’une créance au titre de la présente loi se prescrit par six ans à compter de la date à laquelle la créance devient exigible.



Prescription










Deduction and set-off



(2) Money owing by a person under this Act may be recovered at any time by way of deduction from, set-off against or, in Quebec, compensation against any sum of money that may be due or payable by Her Majesty in right of Canada to the person or their estate or succession.









(2) Le recouvrement, par voie de compensation ou de déduction, du montant d’une créance exigible d’une personne au titre de la présente loi peut être effectué en tout temps sur toute somme à payer par Sa Majesté du chef du Canada à la personne ou à sa succession.



Compensation et déduction










Acknowledgment of liability



(3) If a person acknowledges liability for money owing under this Act, the time during which the limitation or prescription period has run before the acknowledgment of liability does not count in the calculation of that period.









(3) Si une personne reconnaît qu’elle est responsable d’une créance exigible au titre de la présente loi, la période courue avant cette reconnaissance de responsabilité ne compte pas dans le calcul du délai de prescription.



Reconnaissance de responsabilité










Acknowledgment of liability after end of limitation or prescription period



(4) If a person acknowledges liability for money owing under this Act after the end of the limitation or prescription period, an action or proceedings to recover the money may, subject to subsections (3) and (5), be brought within six years after the date of the acknowledgment of liability.









(4) Si, après l’expiration du délai de prescription, une personne reconnaît qu’elle est responsable d’une créance exigible au titre de la présente loi, une poursuite en recouvrement peut être intentée, sous réserve des paragraphes (3) et (5), dans les six ans suivant la date de la reconnaissance de responsabilité.



Reconnaissance de responsabilité après l’expiration du délai de prescription










Limitation or prescription period suspended



(5) The running of a limitation or prescription period in respect of an apprentice loan is suspended during any period in which it is prohibited to commence or continue an action or other proceedings against the borrower to recover money owing under the loan.









(5) La prescription ne court pas pendant la période au cours de laquelle il est interdit d’intenter ou de continuer contre un emprunteur des poursuites en recouvrement d’une créance exigible au titre de la présente loi relative à un prêt aux apprentis.



Suspension du délai de prescription










Enforcement proceedings



(6) This section does not apply in respect of an action or proceedings relating to the execution, renewal or enforcement of a judgment.









(6) Le présent article ne s’applique pas aux poursuites relatives à l’exécution, à la mise en oeuvre ou au renouvellement d’une décision judiciaire.



Mise en oeuvre de décisions judiciaires










Definition of “acknowledgement of liability”



(7) In this section, the expression “acknowledgement of liability” has the meaning assigned by the regulations.









(7) Au présent article, l’expression « reconnaissance de responsabilité » s’entend au sens des règlements.



Définition de « reconnaissance de responsabilité »










Requirement to provide information or documents



18. (1) For the purpose of verifying compliance or preventing non-compliance with this Act, the Minister may, by notice served personally or by confirmed delivery service, require any person to whom an apprentice loan has been made to provide the Minister, within the time and in the manner that are stipulated in the notice, with any information or document that is in their possession or to which they could reasonably be expected to have access.









18. (1) Le ministre peut, dans le but de vérifier le respect de la présente loi ou d’en prévenir le non-respect, exiger de toute personne à qui un prêt aux apprentis a été octroyé, par avis signifié à personne ou transmis par un service de messagerie qui fournit une preuve de livraison, qu’elle lui fournisse, dans le délai et de la manière que précise l’avis, des renseignements ou des documents dont elle dispose ou auxquels elle peut normalement avoir accès.



Fourniture de renseignements ou production de documents










Copies as evidence



(2) When a document is provided in accord-ance with subsection (1), the Minister may make, or cause to be made, one or more certified copies of it and any of those copies is evidence of the nature and content of the original document and has the same probative force as the original document would have if it were proven in the ordinary way.









(2) Il peut faire ou faire faire une ou plusieurs copies certifiées des documents fournis, lesquelles font foi de la nature et du contenu des documents originaux et ont la même force probante qu’auraient ceux-ci si leur authenticité était prouvée de la façon usuelle.



Copies










False statement or information



19. (1) Every person who, in respect of an apprentice loan, knowingly makes any false statement or misrepresentation, including by omission, in an application or other document or knowingly provides any false or misleading information, including by omission, is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000.









19. (1) Quiconque, à propos d’un prêt aux apprentis, fait délibérément une déclaration fausse ou erronée dans une demande ou un autre document, notamment par omission, ou fournit délibérément un renseignement faux ou trompeur, notamment par omission, commet une infraction et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité par procédure sommaire, une amende maximale de mille dollars.



Fausses déclarations










Limitation period



(2) A prosecution for an offence under this Act may not be instituted later than six years after the time when the subject matter of the complaint arose.









(2) Les poursuites visant une infraction à la présente loi se prescrivent par six ans à compter de sa perpétration.



Prescription










Administrative measures



20. (1) If a person, in respect of an apprentice loan, knowingly makes any false statement or misrepresentation, including by omission, in an application or other document or knowingly provides any false or misleading information, including by omission, the Minister may take any measure provided for in the regulations.









20. (1) Si une personne, à propos d’un prêt aux apprentis, fait délibérément une déclaration fausse ou erronée dans une demande ou un autre document, notamment par omission, ou fournit délibérément un renseignement faux ou trompeur, notamment par omission, le ministre peut prendre toute mesure prévue par règlement.



Mesures administratives










Notice



(2) However, the Minister may not take any measure under subsection (1) without having given the person 60 days’ notice of the Minister’s intention to take it.









(2) Il ne peut toutefois prendre une mesure visée au paragraphe (1) que s’il a donné à la personne concernée un avis de soixante jours de son intention.



Avis










Submissions



(3) The person may make submissions to the Minister in respect of the measure at any time.









(3) La personne concernée peut présenter au ministre des observations à l’égard de la mesure.



Observations










Rescission or modification of measure



(4) The Minister may rescind or modify a measure taken under subsection (1) if new facts are presented or the Minister considers that the measure was taken without knowledge of a material fact or on the basis of a mistake concerning one.









(4) Le ministre peut modifier la mesure ou l’annuler si des faits nouveaux lui sont présentés ou si, à son avis, elle a été prise avant que soit connu un fait essentiel ou sur le fondement d’une erreur relative à un tel fait.



Modification ou annulation de la mesure










Authority to enter into agreements and arrangements



21. The Minister may








(a) enter into agreements or arrangements with any department, board or agency of the Government of Canada or any other public or private organization or agency to assist the Minister in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act; and








(b) with the approval of the Governor in Council, enter into agreements or arrangements with the government of any province to facilitate the administration or enforcement of this Act.









21. Le ministre peut conclure des arrangements ou accords :



Pouvoir de conclure des arrangements ou accords




a) avec des ministères ou organismes fédéraux, ou d’autres organismes des secteurs public ou privé, en vue de faciliter l’application de la présente loi;








b) avec l’agrément du gouverneur en conseil, avec tout gouvernement provincial pour faciliter la mise en oeuvre ou l’observation de la présente loi.














Payment out of C.R.F.



22. Any amount payable by the Minister under this Act, the regulations or an agreement or arrangement entered into under this Act, including any apprentice loans to be made by the Minister, is to be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund.









22. Les paiements qui incombent au ministre aux termes de la présente loi, des règlements ou des accords ou arrangements conclus en vertu de la présente loi, notamment les prêts aux apprentis qu’il octroie, sont faits sur le Trésor.



Paiements sur le Trésor










Consequential Amendments









Modifications corrélatives










R.S., c. B-3; 1992, c. 27, s. 2



Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act









Loi sur la faillite et l’insolvabilité



L.R., ch. B-3; 1992, ch. 27, art. 2










1997, c. 12, s. 105(2)



484. (1) Subsection 178(1) of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (g) and by replacing paragraph (h) with the following:









484. (1) L’alinéa 178(1)h) de la Loi sur la faillite et l’insolvabilité est remplacé par ce qui suit :



1997, ch.12, par. 105(2)












(g.1) any debt or obligation in respect of a loan made under the Apprentice Loans Act where the date of bankruptcy of the bankrupt occurred






(i) before the date on which the bankrupt ceased, under that Act, to be an eligible apprentice within the meaning of that Act, or






(ii) within seven years after the date on which the bankrupt ceased to be an eligible apprentice; or






(h) any debt for interest owed in relation to an amount referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (g.1).









g.1) de toute dette ou obligation découlant d’un prêt octroyé au titre de la Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis lorsque la faillite est survenue avant la date à laquelle le failli a cessé, au regard de cette loi, d’être un apprenti admissible, au sens de cette loi, ou dans les sept ans suivant cette date;






h) de toute dette relative aux intérêts dus à l’égard d’une somme visée à l’un des alinéas a) à g.1).












2005, c. 47, s. 107(3)



(2) The portion of subsection 178(1.1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:









(2) Le paragraphe 178(1.1) de la même loi est remplacé par ce qui suit :



2005, ch. 47, par. 107(3)










Court may order non-application of subsection (1)



(1.1) At any time after five years after the day on which a bankrupt who has a debt referred to in paragraph (1)(g) or (g.1) ceases to be a full- or part-time student or an eligible apprentice, as the case may be, under the applicable Act or enactment, the court may, on application, order that subsection (1) does not apply to the debt if the court is satisfied that









(1.1) Lorsque le failli qui a une dette visée aux alinéas (1)g) ou g.1) n’est plus un étudiant à temps plein ou à temps partiel ou un apprenti admissible, selon le cas, depuis au moins cinq ans au regard de la loi applicable, le tribunal peut, sur demande, ordonner que la dette soit soustraite à l’application du paragraphe (1) s’il est convaincu que le failli a agi de bonne foi relativement à ses obligations découlant de cette dette et qu’il a et continuera à avoir des difficultés financières telles qu’il ne pourra pas acquitter celle-ci.



Ordonnance de non-application du paragraphe (1)








2005, c. 34; 2013, c. 40, s. 204



Department of Employment and Social Development Act









Loi sur le ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social



2005, ch. 34; 2013, ch. 40, art. 204












485. Section 70.1 of the Department of Employment and Social Development Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (e):









485. L’article 70.1 de la Loi sur le ministère de l’Emploi et du Développement social est modifié par adjonction, après l’alinéa e), de ce qui suit :














(e.1) the Apprentice Loans Act;









e.1) la Loi sur les prêts aux apprentis;












Coming into Force









Entrée en vigueur












Order in council



486. This Division comes into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.









486. La présente section entre en vigueur à la date fixée par décret.



Décret






























SCHEDULE 1 





ANNEXE 1 






(Section 96)





(article 96)


















 


 


Most-Favoured-Nation Tariff


Preferential Tariff




Tariff Item 


Description of Goods


 Initial Rate


 Final Rate


 Initial Rate


 Final Rate






 
8905.20.11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


---Drilling platforms:
----Used in drilling activity for exploration, 
  delineation or development of offshore projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Free (A)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
UST: Free
MT: Free
MUST: Free
CT: Free
CIAT: Free
CRT: Free
IT: Free
NT: Free
SLT: Free
JT: Free
PT: Free
COLT: Free
PAT: Free
GPT: Free
LDCT: Free
CCCT: Free
AUT: N/A
NZT: N/A


 
UST: Free (A)
MT: Free (A)
MUST: Free (A)
CT: Free (A)
CIAT: Free (A)
CRT: Free (A)
IT: Free (A)
NT: Free (A)
SLT: Free (A)
JT: Free (A)
PT: Free (A)
COLT: Free (A)
PAT: Free (A)
GPT: Free (A)
LDCT: Free (A)
CCCT: Free (A)
AUT: N/A 
NZT: N/A 




8905.20.19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


----Other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


20%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 20% (A)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


UST: Free
MT: Free
MUST: Free
CT: Free
CIAT: Free
CRT: Free
IT: 15%
NT: 15%
JT: Free
PT: 2.5%
COLT: 8.5%
PAT: Free
GPT: 20%
LDCT: Free
CCCT: Free
AUT: N/A
NZT: N/A


UST: Free (A)
MT: Free (A)
MUST: Free (A)
CT: Free (A)
CIAT: Free (A)
CRT: Free (A)
IT: Free (F)
NT: Free (F)
JT: Free (A)
PT: Free (F)
COLT: Free (F)
PAT: Free (A)
GPT: 20% (A)
LDCT: Free (A)
CCCT: Free (A)
AUT: N/A 
NZT: N/A 




 
 
8905.90.11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


---Drill-ships, drilling barges and
  floating drilling rigs:
----Drill-ships used in drilling activity 
   for exploration, delineation or development 
   of offshore projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Free (A)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
UST: Free
MT: Free
MUST: Free
CT: Free
CIAT: Free
CRT: Free
IT: Free
NT: Free
SLT: Free
JT: Free
PT: Free
COLT: Free
PAT: Free
GPT: Free
LDCT: Free
CCCT: Free
AUT: N/A
NZT: N/A


 
 
UST: Free (A)
MT: Free (A)
MUST: Free (A)
CT: Free (A)
CIAT: Free (A)
CRT: Free (A)
IT: Free (A)
NT: Free (A)
SLT: Free (A)
JT: Free (A)
PT: Free (A)
COLT: Free (A)
PAT: Free (A)
GPT: Free (A)
LDCT: Free (A)
CCCT: Free (A)
AUT: N/A 
NZT: N/A 




8905.90.19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


----Other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


20%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


20% (A)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


UST: Free
MT: Free
MUST: Free
CT: Free
CIAT: Free
CRT: Free
IT: 15%
NT: 15%
SLT: 15%
JT: Free
PT: 2.5%
COLT: 8.5%
PAT: Free
GPT: 20%
LDCT: Free
CCCT: Free
AUT: N/A
NZT: N/A


UST: Free (A)
MT: Free (A)
MUST: Free (A)
CT: Free (A)
CIAT: Free (A)
CRT: Free (A)
IT: Free (F)
NT: Free (F)
SLT: Free (F)
JT: Free (A)
PT: Free (F)
COLT: Free (F)
PAT: Free (A)
GPT: 20% (A)
LDCT: Free (A)
CCCT: Free (A)
AUT: N/A 
NZT: N/A 





















SCHEDULE 2 





ANNEXE 2 






(Section 97)





(article 97)

















Tariff
Item


 
Most-Favoured-Nation Tariff


 
 


 
Preferential Tariff


 
 






8905.20.19
 
 
 
 
 


 


 


Effective on July 1, 2014        IT: 12.5%
Effective on July 1, 2015         IT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016        IT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017         IT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018         IT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        IT: Free


 




 
 
 
 
 
 




Effective on July 1, 2014         NT: 12.5% 
Effective on July 1, 2015         NT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016         NT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017         NT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018         NT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        NT: Free





 
 
 
 
 
 




Effective on July 1, 2014        SLT: 12.5%
Effective on July 1, 2015        SLT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016        SLT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017        SLT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018        SLT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        SLT: Free





 




Effective on January 1, 2015        PT: Free





 
 
 




Effective on January 1, 2015        COLT: 5.5%
Effective on January 1, 2016        COLT: 2.5%
Effective on January 1, 2017         COLT: Free





8905.90.19
 
 
 
 
 




Effective on July 1, 2014        IT: 12.5%
Effective on July 1, 2015         IT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016        IT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017         IT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018         IT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        IT: Free





 
 
 
 
 
 




Effective on July 1, 2014         NT: 12.5% 
Effective on July 1, 2015         NT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016         NT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017         NT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018         NT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        NT: Free





 
 
 
 
 
 




Effective on July 1, 2014        SLT: 12.5%
Effective on July 1, 2015        SLT: 10%
Effective on July 1, 2016        SLT: 7.5%
Effective on July 1, 2017        SLT: 5%
Effective on July 1, 2018        SLT: 2.5%
Effective on July 1, 2019        SLT: Free





 




Effective on January 1, 2015        PT: Free





 
 
 




Effective on January 1, 2015        COLT: 5.5%
Effective on January 1, 2016        COLT: 2.5%
Effective on January 1, 2017         COLT: Free






















SCHEDULE 3 





ANNEXE 3 






(Section 99)





(article 99)






SCHEDULE 





ANNEXE 






(Section 2)





(article 2)






AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA TO IMPROVE INTERNATIONAL TAX COMPLIANCE THROUGH ENHANCED EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION UNDER THE CONVENTION BETWEEN CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME AND ON CAPITAL





ACCORD ENTRE LE GOUVERNEMENT DU CANADA ET LE GOUVERNEMENT DES ÉTATS-UNIS D’AMÉRIQUE EN VUE D’AMÉLIORER L’OBSERVATION FISCALE À L’ÉCHELLE INTERNATIONALE AU MOYEN D’UN MEILLEUR ÉCHANGE DE RENSEIGNEMENTS EN VERTU DE LA CONVENTION ENTRE LE CANADA ET LES ÉTATS-UNIS D’AMÉRIQUE EN MATIÈRE D’IMPÔTS SUR LE REVENU ET SUR LA FORTUNE






WHEREAS, THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (each, a “Party” and together, the “Parties”) have a longstanding and close relationship with respect to mutual assistance in tax matters and desire to conclude an agreement to improve international tax compliance by further building on that relationship;





ATTENDU QUE LE GOUVERNEMENT DU CANADA ET LE GOUVERNEMENT DES ÉTATS-UNIS D’AMÉRIQUE (dénommés séparément « partie » et collectivement « parties ») entretiennent de longue date une relation étroite concernant l’assistance mutuelle en matière fiscale et souhaitent conclure un accord en vue d’améliorer l’observation fiscale à l’échelle internationale en approfondissant cette relation;






WHEREAS, Article XXVII of the Convention between Canada and the United States of America with Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital, done at Washington on 26 September 1980, as amended by the Protocols done on 14 June 1983, 28 March 1984, 17 March 1995, 29 July 1997 and 21 September 2007 (the “Convention”) authorizes the exchange of information for tax purposes, including on an automatic basis;





ATTENDU QUE l’article XXVII de la Convention entre le Canada et les États-Unis d’Amérique en matière d’impôts sur le revenu et sur la fortune, faite à Washington le 26 septembre 1980 et modifiée par les protocoles faits le 14 juin 1983, le 28 mars 1984, le 17 mars 1995, le 29 juillet 1997 et le 21 septembre 2007, (la « Convention ») autorise l’échange de renseignements à des fins fiscales, y compris de manière automatique;






WHEREAS, the United States of America enacted provisions commonly known as the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (“FATCA”), which introduce a reporting regime for financial institutions with respect to certain accounts;





ATTENDU QUE les États-Unis d’Amérique ont adopté des dispositions connues sous le nom de Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (la « loi FATCA »), lesquelles instaurent un régime de déclaration pour les institutions financières à l’égard de certains comptes;






WHEREAS, the Governments of Canada and the United States of America are supportive of applying the underlying policy goal of FATCA on a reciprocal basis to improve tax compliance;





ATTENDU QUE les gouvernements du Canada et des États-Unis d’Amérique soutiennent l’application, sur une base de réciprocité, de l’objectif stratégique fondamental de la loi FATCA en vue d’améliorer l’observation fiscale;






WHEREAS, FATCA has raised a number of issues, including that Canadian financial institutions may not be able to comply with certain aspects of FATCA due to domestic legal impediments;





ATTENDU QUE la loi FATCA a soulevé un certain nombre de questions, y compris le fait que les institutions financières canadiennes pourraient ne pas être en mesure de se conformer à certains de ses aspects en raison d’obstacles juridiques internes;






WHEREAS, the Government of the United States of America collects information regarding certain accounts maintained by U.S. financial institutions held by residents of Canada and is committed to exchanging such information with the Government of Canada and pursuing equivalent levels of exchange;





ATTENDU QUE le gouvernement des États-Unis d’Amérique recueille des renseignements sur certains comptes de résidents du Canada détenus auprès d’institutions financières américaines et est résolu à échanger ces renseignements avec le gouvernement du Canada et à atteindre des niveaux équivalents d’échanges;






WHEREAS, the Parties are committed to working together over the longer term towards achieving common reporting and due diligence standards for financial institutions;





ATTENDU QUE les parties sont résolues à travailler de concert à long terme en vue d’aboutir à des règles communes de déclaration et à des normes de diligence raisonnable pour les institutions financières;






WHEREAS, the Government of the United States of America acknowledges the need to coordinate the reporting obligations under FATCA with other U.S. tax reporting obligations of Canadian financial institutions to avoid duplicative reporting;





ATTENDU QUE le gouvernement des États-Unis d’Amérique reconnaît la nécessité de coordonner les obligations de déclaration prévues par la loi FATCA et les autres obligations en matière de déclaration fiscale en vigueur aux États-Unis auxquelles sont assujetties les institutions financières canadiennes afin d’éviter les doubles déclarations;






WHEREAS, an intergovernmental approach to FATCA implementation would facilitate compliance by Canadian financial institutions while protecting the ability of Canadians to access financial services;





ATTENDU QU’une approche intergouvernementale concernant la mise en œuvre de la loi FATCA faciliterait l’observation par les institutions financières canadiennes tout en protégeant la capacité des Canadiens à obtenir des services financiers;






WHEREAS, the Parties desire to conclude an agreement to improve international tax compliance and provide for the implementation of FATCA based on domestic reporting and reciprocal automatic exchange pursuant to the Convention and subject to the confidentiality and other protections provided for therein, including the provisions limiting the use of the information exchanged under the Convention;





ATTENDU QUE les parties souhaitent conclure un accord en vue d’améliorer l’observation fiscale à l’échelle internationale et de prévoir la mise en œuvre de la loi FATCA sur la base d’obligations de déclaration nationales et d’échanges automatiques réciproques en application de la Convention sous réserve de la confidentialité et d’autres garanties prévues par celle-ci, y compris les dispositions qui limitent l’utilisation des renseignements échangés en vertu de la Convention,






NOW, THEREFORE, THE PARTIES HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:





LES PARTIES SONT CONVENUES DES DISPOSITIONS SUIVANTES :






ARTICLE 1 





ARTICLE PREMIER 






Definitions





Définitions






1. For purposes of this agreement and any annexes thereto (“Agreement”), the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:





1. Les termes ci-après sont définis comme il suit pour l’application du présent accord et de ses annexes (l’« Accord »).






a) The term “United States” has the same meaning as in the Convention. Any reference to a “State” of the United States includes the District of Columbia.





a) Le terme « États-Unis » s’entend au sens de la Convention. Toute mention d’un « État » des États-Unis comprend le district de Columbia.






b) The term “U.S. Territory” means American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands.





b) Le terme « territoire américain » désigne les Samoa américaines, le Commonwealth des Mariannes du Nord, Guam, le Commonwealth de Porto Rico ou les îles Vierges américaines.






c) The term “IRS” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Service.





c) Le terme « IRS » désigne l’Internal Revenue Service des États-Unis.






d) The term “Canada” has the same meaning as in the Convention.





d) Le terme « Canada » s’entend au sens de la Convention.






e) The term “Partner Jurisdiction” means a jurisdiction that has in effect an agreement with the United States to facilitate the implementation of FATCA. The IRS shall publish a list identifying all Partner Jurisdictions.





e) Le terme « juridiction partenaire » désigne une autorité territoriale liée par un accord en vigueur avec les États-Unis visant à faciliter la mise en œuvre de la loi FATCA. L’IRS publie la liste des juridictions partenaires.






f) The term “Competent Authority” means:





f) Le terme « autorité compétente » désigne :	






(1) in the case of the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary’s delegate; and





(1) dans le cas des États-Unis, le secrétaire du Trésor ou son représentant;






(2) in the case of Canada, the Minister of National Revenue or the Minister of National Revenue’s authorized representative.





(2) dans le cas du Canada, le ministre du Revenu national ou son représentant autorisé.






g) The term “Financial Institution” means a Custodial Institution, a Depository Institution, an Investment Entity, or a Specified Insurance Company.





g) Le terme « institution financière » désigne un établissement de garde de valeurs, un établissement de dépôt, une entité d’investissement ou une compagnie d’assurance particulière.






h) The term “Custodial Institution” means any Entity that holds, as a substantial portion of its business, financial assets for the account of others. An entity holds financial assets for the account of others as a substantial portion of its business if the entity’s gross income attributable to the holding of financial assets and related financial services equals or exceeds 20 percent of the entity’s gross income during the shorter of:





h) Le terme « établissement de garde de valeurs » désigne toute entité dont une part importante de l’activité consiste à détenir des actifs financiers pour le compte de tiers. La détention d’actifs financiers pour le compte de tiers représente une part importante de l’activité d’une entité si le revenu brut de celle-ci attribuable à la détention d’actifs financiers et aux services financiers connexes est égal ou supérieur à 20 p. 100 de son revenu brut durant la plus courte des périodes suivantes :






(1) the three-year period that ends on December 31 (or the final day of a non-calendar year accounting period) prior to the year in which the determination is being made; or





(1) la période de trois ans qui prend fin le 31 décembre (ou le dernier jour d’un exercice comptable décalé) précédant l’année au cours de laquelle le calcul est effectué;






(2) the period during which the entity has been in existence.





(2) la période écoulée depuis la création de l’entité.






i) The term “Depository Institution” means any Entity that accepts deposits in the ordinary course of a banking or similar business.





i) Le terme « établissement de dépôt » désigne toute entité qui accepte des dépôts dans le cours normal d’une activité bancaire ou apparentée.






j) The term “Investment Entity” means any Entity that conducts as a business (or is managed by an entity that conducts as a business) one or more of the following activities or operations for or on behalf of a customer:





j) Le terme « entité d’investissement » désigne toute entité qui exerce comme activité (ou qui est administrée par une entité qui exerce comme activité) une ou plusieurs des prestations ou opérations ci-après au nom ou pour le compte d’un client :






(1) trading in money market instruments (cheques, bills, certificates of deposit, derivatives, etc.); foreign exchange; exchange, interest rate and index instruments; transferable securities; or commodity futures trading;





(1) transactions sur les instruments du marché monétaire (chèques, billets, certificats de dépôt, instruments dérivés, etc.); marché des changes; instruments sur devises, taux d’intérêt ou indices; valeurs mobilières négociables; ou marchés à terme de marchandises;






(2) individual and collective portfolio management; or





(2) gestion individuelle ou collective de portefeuille;






(3) otherwise investing, administering, or managing funds or money on behalf of other persons.





(3) autres opérations d’investissement, d’administration ou de gestion de fonds ou d’argent pour le compte de tiers.






This subparagraph 1(j) shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with similar language set forth in the definition of “financial institution” in the Financial Action Task Force Recommendations.





Le présent alinéa j) est interprété de façon compatible avec le libellé semblable de la définition de « institution financière » qui figure dans les recommandations du Groupe d’action financière.






k) The term “Specified Insurance Company” means any Entity that is an insurance company (or the holding company of an insurance company) that issues, or is obligated to make payments with respect to, a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract.





k) Le terme « compagnie d’assurance particulière » désigne toute entité qui est une compagnie d’assurance (ou la société de portefeuille d’une compagnie d’assurance) qui établit des contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou des contrats de rente ou qui est tenue d’effectuer des paiements au titre de tels contrats.






l) The term “Canadian Financial Institution” means:





l) Le terme « institution financière canadienne » désigne :






(1) any Financial Institution that is resident in Canada, but excluding any branch of such Financial Institution that is located outside Canada, and





(1) toute institution financière qui réside au Canada, à l’exclusion de ses succursales situées à l’extérieur du Canada;






(2) any branch of a Financial Institution that is not resident in Canada, if such branch is located in Canada.





(2) toute succursale, située au Canada, d’une institution financière qui ne réside pas au Canada.






m) The term “Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution” means:





m) Le terme « institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire » désigne :






(1) any Financial Institution that is established in a Partner Jurisdiction, but excluding any branch of such Financial Institution that is located outside the Partner Jurisdiction, and





(1) toute institution financière établie dans une juridiction partenaire, à l’exclusion de ses succursales situées à l’extérieur de la juridiction partenaire;






(2) any branch of a Financial Institution that is not established in the Partner Jurisdiction, if such branch is located in the Partner Jurisdiction.





(2) toute succursale, située dans une juridiction partenaire, d’une institution financière qui n’est pas établie dans la juridiction partenaire.






n) The term “Reporting Financial Institution” means a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution or a Reporting U.S. Financial Institution, as the context requires.





n) Le terme « institution financière déclarante » désigne, selon le contexte, une institution financière canadienne déclarante ou une institution financière américaine déclarante.






o) The term “Reporting Canadian Financial Institution” means any Canadian Financial Institution that is not a Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institution.





o) Le terme « institution financière canadienne déclarante » désigne toute institution financière canadienne qui n’est pas une institution financière canadienne non déclarante.






p) The term “Reporting U.S. Financial Institution” means:





p) Le terme « institution financière américaine déclarante » désigne :






(1) any Financial Institution that is resident in the United States, but excluding any branch of such Financial Institution that is located outside the United States, and





(1) toute institution financière qui réside aux États-Unis, à l’exclusion de ses succursales situées à l’extérieur des États-Unis;






(2) any branch of a Financial Institution that is not resident in the United States, if such branch is located in the United States,





(2) toute succursale, située aux États-Unis, d’une institution financière qui ne réside pas aux États-Unis,






provided that the Financial Institution or branch has control, receipt, or custody of income with respect to which information is required to be exchanged under subparagraph (2)(b) of Article 2 of this Agreement.





à condition que cette institution financière ou cette succursale contrôle, perçoive ou conserve un revenu à l’égard duquel des renseignements doivent être échangés en application de l’alinéa 2b) de l’article 2 du présent Accord.






q) The term “Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institution” means any Canadian Financial Institution, or other Entity resident in Canada, that is identified in Annex II as a Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institution or that otherwise qualifies as a deemed compliant FFI or an exempt beneficial owner under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations in effect on the date of signature of this Agreement.





q) 	Le terme « institution financière canadienne non déclarante » désigne toute institution financière canadienne ou autre entité résidant au Canada qui figure à l’annexe II en tant qu’institution financière canadienne non déclarante ou qui remplit par ailleurs les conditions nécessaires pour être une IFE réputée conforme (deemed-compliant FFI) ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner) en vertu des dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis en vigueur à la date de la signature du présent Accord.






r) The term “Nonparticipating Financial Institution” means a nonparticipating FFI, as that term is defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations, but does not include a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution other than a Financial Institution treated as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution pursuant to subparagraph 2(b) of Article 5 of this Agreement or the corresponding provision in an agreement between the United States and a Partner Jurisdiction.





r) Le terme « institution financière non participante » désigne une IFE non participante, au sens donné au terme « nonparticipating FFI » dans les Treasury Regulations des États-Unis. En sont exclues les institutions financières canadiennes et les institutions financières d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada, sauf s’il s’agit d’une institution financière qui est considérée comme une institution financière non participante selon l’alinéa 2b) de l’article 5 du présent Accord ou selon la disposition correspondante d’un accord conclu entre les États-Unis et une juridiction partenaire.






s) The term “Financial Account” means an account maintained by a Financial Institution, and includes:





s) Le terme « compte financier » désigne un compte auprès d’une institution financière et comprend :






(1) in the case of an Entity that is a Financial Institution solely because it is an Investment Entity, any equity or debt interest (other than interests that are regularly traded on an established securities market) in the Financial Institution;





(1) dans le cas d’une entité qui constitue une institution financière du seul fait qu’elle est une entité d’investissement, tout titre de participation ou de créance émis par l’institution financière (sauf les titres qui font l’objet de transactions régulières sur un marché boursier réglementé);






(2) in the case of a Financial Institution not described in subparagraph 1(s)(1) of this Article, any equity or debt interest in the Financial Institution (other than interests that are regularly traded on an established securities market), if:





(2) dans le cas d’une institution financière non visée au sous-alinéa s)(1) du présent article, tout titre de participation ou de créance émis par l’institution financière (sauf les titres qui font l’objet de transactions régulières sur un marché boursier réglementé) si, à la fois :






(A) the value of the debt or equity interest is determined, directly or indirectly, primarily by reference to assets that give rise to U.S. Source Withholdable Payments, and





(A) la valeur du titre de participation ou de créance est déterminée, directement ou indirectement, principalement par rapport à des actifs qui donnent lieu à des paiements de source américaine assujettis à une retenue,






(B) the class of interests was established with a purpose of avoiding reporting in accordance with this Agreement; and





(B) la catégorie des titres en cause a été créée dans le but d’éviter les obligations de déclaration prévues au présent Accord;






(3) any Cash Value Insurance Contract and any Annuity Contract issued or maintained by a Financial Institution, other than a noninvestment-linked, nontransferable immediate life annuity that is issued to an individual and monetizes a pension or disability benefit provided under an account, product, or arrangement identified as excluded from the definition of Financial Account in Annex II.





(3) tout contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat et tout contrat de rente établi ou tenu par une institution financière, autre qu’une rente viagère immédiate, incessible et non liée à un placement qui est versée à une personne physique et qui correspond à une pension de retraite ou d’invalidité perçue dans le cadre d’un compte, d’un produit ou d’un arrangement exclu du champ d’application de la définition de « compte financier » selon l’annexe II.






Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term “Financial Account” does not include any account, product, or arrangement identified as excluded from the definition of Financial Account in Annex II. For purposes of this Agreement, interests are “regularly traded” if there is a meaningful volume of trading with respect to the interests on an ongoing basis, and an “established securities market” means an exchange that is officially recognized and supervised by a governmental authority in which the market is located and that has a meaningful annual value of shares traded on the exchange. For purposes of this subparagraph 1(s), an interest in a Financial Institution is not “regularly traded” and shall be treated as a Financial Account if the holder of the interest (other than a Financial Institution acting as an intermediary) is registered on the books of such Financial Institution. The preceding sentence will not apply to interests first registered on the books of such Financial Institution prior to July 1, 2014, and with respect to interests first registered on the books of such Financial Institution on or after July 1, 2014, a Financial Institution is not required to apply the preceding sentence prior to January 1, 2016.





Malgré ce qui précède, ne sont pas des « comptes financiers » les comptes, produits ou arrangements qui sont exclus du champ d’application de la définition de « compte financier » selon l’annexe II. Pour l’application du présent Accord, des titres font l’objet de « transactions régulières » s’ils font l’objet d’un volume de transactions significatif de façon continue, et le terme « marché boursier réglementé » désigne une bourse qui est officiellement reconnue et surveillée par une autorité gouvernementale ayant compétence sur le territoire où le marché est situé, et dont la valeur annuelle des actions qui y sont négociées est significative. Pour l’application du présent alinéa s), le titre d’une institution financière ne fait pas l’objet de « transactions régulières » et est considéré comme un compte financier si son détenteur (à l’exception d’une institution financière agissant à titre d’intermédiaire) est inscrit dans les livres de l’institution financière. La phrase précédente ne s’applique pas aux titres qui sont inscrits pour la première fois dans les livres de l’institution financière avant le 1er juillet 2014. En ce qui a trait aux titres qui sont inscrits pour la première fois dans les livres de l’institution financière à cette date ou par la suite, l’institution financière n’est pas tenue d’appliquer cette phrase avant le 1er janvier 2016.






t) The term “Depository Account” includes any commercial, checking, savings, time, or thrift account, or an account that is evidenced by a certificate of deposit, thrift certificate, investment certificate, certificate of indebtedness, or other similar instrument maintained by a Financial Institution in the ordinary course of a banking or similar business. A Depository Account also includes an amount held by an insurance company pursuant to a guaranteed investment contract or similar agreement to pay or credit interest thereon.





t) Le terme « compte de dépôt » comprend les comptes commerciaux, les comptes de chèques, d’épargne ou à terme et les comptes dont l’existence est attestée par un certificat de dépôt, un certificat d’épargne, un certificat d’investissement, un titre de créance ou un autre instrument similaire auprès d’une institution financière dans le cours normal d’une activité bancaire ou apparentée. Sont également des comptes de dépôt les sommes détenues par les compagnies d’assurance en vertu d’un contrat de placement garanti ou d’un accord semblable pour verser ou créditer des intérêts sur ces sommes.






u) The term “Custodial Account” means an account (other than an Insurance Contract or Annuity Contract) for the benefit of another person that holds any financial instrument or contract held for investment (including, but not limited to, a share or stock in a corporation, a note, bond, debenture, or other evidence of indebtedness, a currency or commodity transaction, a credit default swap, a swap based upon a nonfinancial index, a notional principal contract, an Insurance Contract or Annuity Contract, and any option or other derivative instrument).





u) Le terme « compte de dépositaire » désigne un compte, sauf un contrat d’assurance ou un contrat de rente, au bénéfice d’une autre personne et sur lequel figure tout instrument financier ou contrat à des fins d’investissement, notamment une action d’une société, un billet, une obligation — garantie ou non — ou un autre titre de créance, une opération de change ou sur marchandises, un swap sur défaillance de crédit, un swap fondé sur indice non financier, un contrat à principal notionnel, un contrat d’assurance, un contrat de rente ou toute option ou autre instrument dérivé.






v) The term “Equity Interest” means, in the case of a partnership that is a Financial Institution, either a capital or profits interest in the partnership. In the case of a trust that is a Financial Institution, an Equity Interest is considered to be held by any person treated as a settlor or beneficiary of all or a portion of the trust, or any other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust. A Specified U.S. Person shall be treated as being a beneficiary of a foreign trust if such Specified U.S. Person has the right to receive directly or indirectly (for example, through a nominee) a mandatory distribution or may receive, directly or indirectly, a discretionary distribution from the trust.





v) Le terme « titre de participation » désigne, dans le cas d’une société de personnes qui est une institution financière, toute participation au capital ou aux bénéfices de la société de personnes. Dans le cas d’une fiducie qui est une institution financière, un titre de participation est considéré comme étant détenu par toute personne considérée comme l’auteur ou le bénéficiaire de tout ou partie de la fiducie ainsi que par toute autre personne physique exerçant en dernier lieu un contrôle effectif sur la fiducie. Une personne désignée des États-Unis est considérée comme le bénéficiaire d’une fiducie étrangère si elle a le droit de recevoir, directement ou indirectement (par exemple, par l’intermédiaire d’un prête-nom), une distribution obligatoire ou si elle peut recevoir, directement ou indirectement, une distribution discrétionnaire de la part de la fiducie.






w) The term “Insurance Contract” means a contract (other than an Annuity Contract) under which the issuer agrees to pay an amount upon the occurrence of a specified contingency involving mortality, morbidity, accident, liability, or property risk.





w) Le terme « contrat d’assurance » désigne un contrat, sauf un contrat de rente, dans lequel l’émetteur s’engage à verser une somme d’argent en cas de réalisation d’un risque particulier comportant un décès, une maladie, un accident, une responsabilité civile ou un dommage matériel.






x) The term “Annuity Contract” means a contract under which the issuer agrees to make payments for a period of time determined in whole or in part by reference to the life expectancy of one or more individuals. The term also includes a contract that is considered to be an Annuity Contract in accordance with the law, regulation, or practice of the jurisdiction in which the contract was issued, and under which the issuer agrees to make payments for a term of years.





x) Le terme « contrat de rente » désigne un contrat dans lequel l’émetteur s’engage à effectuer des paiements pendant une certaine durée, laquelle est déterminée en tout ou en partie par l’espérance de vie d’une ou de plusieurs personnes physiques. Ce terme comprend également un contrat considéré comme un contrat de rente par la législation, la réglementation ou la pratique du territoire où il a été établi, et aux termes duquel l’émetteur s’engage à effectuer des paiements durant un certain nombre d’années.






y) The term “Cash Value Insurance Contract” means an Insurance Contract (other than an indemnity reinsurance contract between two insurance companies) that has a Cash Value greater than $50,000.





y) Le terme « contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat » désigne un contrat d’assurance, sauf un contrat de réassurance conclu entre deux compagnies d’assurance, dont la valeur de rachat est supérieure à 50 000 $.






z) The term “Cash Value” means the greater of (i) the amount that the policyholder is entitled to receive upon surrender or termination of the contract (determined without reduction for any surrender charge or policy loan), and (ii) the amount the policyholder can borrow under or with regard to the contract. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term “Cash Value” does not include an amount payable under an Insurance Contract as:





z) Le terme « valeur de rachat » désigne la plus élevée des sommes suivantes : (i) la somme que le souscripteur du contrat d’assurance est en droit de recevoir en cas de rachat ou de cessation du contrat (calculée sans déduction des éventuels frais de rachat ou avances) et (ii) la somme que le souscripteur du contrat d’assurance peut emprunter en vertu du contrat ou eu égard à son objet. Malgré ce qui précède, le terme « valeur de rachat » ne comprend pas une somme à payer dans le cadre d’un contrat d’assurance au titre :






(1) a personal injury or sickness benefit or other benefit providing indemnification of an economic loss incurred upon the occurrence of the event insured against;





(1) de l’indemnisation d’un dommage corporel, d’une maladie ou d’une perte économique subie lors de la réalisation d’un risque assuré;






(2) a refund to the policyholder of a previously paid premium under an Insurance Contract (other than under a life insurance contract) due to policy cancellation or termination, decrease in risk exposure during the effective period of the Insurance Contract, or arising from a redetermination of the premium due to correction of posting or other similar error; or





(2) d’un remboursement au souscripteur du contrat d’assurance d’une prime payée antérieurement dans le cadre d’un contrat d’assurance (sauf un contrat d’assurance sur la vie) en raison de la résiliation ou de la cessation du contrat, d’une diminution de l’exposition au risque durant la période au cours de laquelle le contrat d’assurance est en vigueur ou d’un nouveau calcul de la prime rendu nécessaire par la détection d’une erreur d’écriture ou d’une autre erreur similaire;






(3) a policyholder dividend based upon the underwriting experience of the contract or group involved.





(3) de la participation due au souscripteur du contrat d’assurance en fonction des résultats techniques du contrat ou du groupe concerné.






aa) The term “Reportable Account” means a U.S. Reportable Account or a Canadian Reportable Account, as the context requires.





aa) Le terme « compte déclarable » désigne, selon le contexte, un compte déclarable américain ou un compte déclarable canadien.






bb) The term “Canadian Reportable Account” means a Financial Account maintained by a Reporting U.S. Financial Institution if:





bb) Le terme « compte déclarable canadien » désigne un compte financier auprès d’une institution financière américaine déclarante à l’égard duquel l’un des faits ci-après s’avère :






(1) in the case of a Depository Account, the account is held by an individual resident in Canada and more than $10 of interest is paid to such account in any given calendar year; or





(1) s’agissant d’un compte de dépôt, le titulaire du compte est une personne physique qui réside au Canada et plus de 10 $ d’intérêts sont versés sur le compte au cours d’une année civile donnée;






(2) in the case of a Financial Account other than a Depository Account, the Account Holder is a resident of Canada, including an Entity that certifies that it is resident in Canada for tax purposes, with respect to which U.S. source income that is subject to reporting under chapter 3 of subtitle A or chapter 61 of subtitle F of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code is paid or credited.





(2) s’agissant d’un compte financier autre qu’un compte de dépôt, le titulaire du compte est un résident du Canada – y compris toute entité qui certifie qu’elle est résidente du Canada à des fins fiscales – auquel est versé, ou au crédit duquel est porté, un revenu de source américaine assujetti aux obligations de déclaration prévues au chapitre 3 du sous-titre A de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis ou au chapitre 61 du sous-titre F de ce code.






cc) The term “U.S. Reportable Account” means a Financial Account maintained by a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution and held by one or more Specified U.S. Persons or by a Non-U.S. Entity with one or more Controlling Persons that is a Specified U.S. Person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an account shall not be treated as a U.S. Reportable Account if such account is not identified as a U.S. Reportable Account after application of the due diligence procedures in Annex I.





cc) Le terme « compte déclarable américain » désigne un compte financier auprès d’une institution financière canadienne déclarante détenu par une ou plusieurs personnes désignées des États-Unis ou par une entité non américaine dont une ou plusieurs des personnes détenant le contrôle sont des personnes désignées des États-Unis. Malgré ce qui précède, n’est pas considéré comme un compte déclarable américain un compte qui ne remplit pas les conditions d’un tel compte après application des procédures de diligence raisonnable prévues à l’annexe I.






dd) The term “Account Holder” means the person listed or identified as the holder of a Financial Account by the Financial Institution that maintains the account. A person, other than a Financial Institution, holding a Financial Account for the benefit or account of another person as agent, custodian, nominee, signatory, investment advisor, or intermediary, is not treated as the Account Holder for purposes of this Agreement, and such other person is treated as the Account Holder. For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence, the term “Financial Institution” does not include a Financial Institution organized or incorporated in a U.S. Territory. In the case of a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract, the Account Holder is any person entitled to access the Cash Value or change the beneficiary of the contract. If no person can access the Cash Value or change the beneficiary, the Account Holder is any person named as the owner in the contract and any person with a vested entitlement to payment under the terms of the contract. Upon the maturity of a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract, each person entitled to receive a payment under the contract is treated as an Account Holder.





dd) Le terme « titulaire de compte » désigne la personne enregistrée ou identifiée comme titulaire d’un compte financier par l’institution financière qui tient le compte. Une personne, autre qu’une institution financière, qui détient un compte financier pour le compte ou le bénéfice d’une autre personne, en tant que mandataire, dépositaire, prête-nom, signataire, conseiller en placement ou intermédiaire, n’est pas considérée comme étant le titulaire du compte pour l’application du présent Accord, et cette autre personne est considérée comme étant le titulaire du compte. Pour l’application de la phrase précédente, le terme « institution financière » ne comprend pas les institutions financières constituées dans un territoire américain. Dans le cas d’un contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou d’un contrat de rente, le titulaire de compte est toute personne autorisée à tirer parti de la valeur de rachat ou à changer le nom du bénéficiaire du contrat. Si nul ne peut tirer parti de la valeur de rachat ou changer le nom du bénéficiaire, le titulaire de compte est toute personne désignée comme propriétaire dans le contrat ainsi que toute personne qui jouit d’un droit absolu à des paiements en vertu du contrat. À l’échéance d’un contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou d’un contrat de rente, chaque personne qui est en droit de recevoir un paiement en vertu du contrat est considérée comme un titulaire de compte.






ee) The term “U.S. Person” means:





ee) Le terme « personne des États-Unis » désigne :






(1) a U.S. citizen or resident individual,





(1) une personne physique qui est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis;






(2) a partnership or corporation organized in the United States or under the laws of the United States or any State thereof,





(2) une société de personnes ou une société constituée aux États-Unis ou selon la législation de ce pays ou d’un de ses États;






(3) a trust if





(3) une fiducie si, à la fois :






(A) a court within the United States would have authority under applicable law to render orders or judgments concerning substantially all issues regarding administration of the trust, and





(A) un tribunal des États-Unis aurait la compétence, selon le droit applicable, de rendre des ordonnances ou des jugements concernant la presque totalité des questions liées à l’administration de la fiducie,






(B) one or more U.S. persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or





(B) une ou plusieurs personnes des États-Unis jouissent d’un droit de contrôle sur toutes les décisions importantes de la fiducie;






(4) an estate of a decedent that is a citizen or resident of the United States.





(4) la succession d’un défunt qui est citoyen ou résident des États-Unis.






This subparagraph 1(ee) shall be interpreted in accordance with the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.





Le présent alinéa ee) est interprété conformément à l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






ff) The term “Specified U.S. Person” means a U.S. Person, other than:





ff) Le terme « personne désignée des États-Unis » désigne une personne des États-Unis, à l’exclusion de ce qui suit :






(1) a corporation the stock of which is regularly traded on one or more established securities markets;





(1) une société dont les actions font l’objet de transactions régulières sur un ou plusieurs marchés boursiers réglementés;






(2) any corporation that is a member of the same expanded affiliated group, as defined in section 1471(e)(2) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, as a corporation described in clause (1);





(2) toute société appartenant au même groupe affilié élargi, au sens donné au terme « expanded affiliated group » à l’article 1471(e)(2) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis, qu’une société visée au sous-alinéa (1);






(3) the United States or any wholly owned agency or instrumentality thereof;





(3) les États-Unis ou toute personne morale de droit public appartenant à cent pour cent à ce pays;






(4) any State of the United States, any U.S. Territory, any political subdivision of any of the foregoing, or any wholly owned agency or instrumentality of any one or more of the foregoing;





(4) les États des États-Unis et les territoires américains ainsi que leurs subdivisions politiques, et toute personne morale de droit public appartenant à cent pour cent à ces États, territoires ou subdivisions;






(5) any organization exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code or an individual retirement plan as defined in section 7701(a)(37) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code;





(5) les organisations exonérées d’impôt en vertu de l’article 501(a) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis et les régimes de retraite personnels, au sens donné au terme « individual retirement plan » à l’article 7701(a)(37) de ce code;






(6) any bank as defined in section 581 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code;





(6) les banques, au sens donné au terme « bank » à l’article 581 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis;






(7) any real estate investment trust as defined in section 856 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code;





(7) les fiducies de placement immobilier, au sens donné au terme « real estate investment trust » à l’article 856 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis;






(8) any regulated investment company as defined in section 851 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code or any entity registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission under the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940;





(8) les sociétés d’investissement réglementées, au sens donné au terme « regulated investment company » à l’article 851 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis, et les entités enregistrées auprès de la Securities and Exchange Commission des États-Unis en application de l’Investment Company Act of 1940 des États-Unis;






(9) any common trust fund as defined in section 584(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code;





(9) les fonds en fiducie collectifs, au sens donné au terme « common trust fund » à l’article 584(a) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis;






(10) any trust that is exempt from tax under section 664(c) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code or that is described in section 4947(a)(1) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code;





(10) les fiducies exonérées d’impôt en vertu de l’article 664(c) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis ou visées à l’article 4947(a)(1) de ce code;






(11) a dealer in securities, commodities, or derivative financial instruments (including notional principal contracts, futures, forwards, and options) that is registered as such under the laws of the United States or any State thereof;





(11) les courtiers en valeurs mobilières, marchandises ou instruments dérivés (y compris les contrats à principal notionnel, les contrats à terme et les options) qui sont enregistrés comme tels en vertu de la législation des États-Unis ou d’un de ses États;






(12) a broker as defined in section 6045(c) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; or





(12) les courtiers, au sens donné au terme « broker » à l’article 6045(c) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis;






(13) any tax exempt trust under a plan that is described in section 403(b) or section 457(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.





(13) les fiducies exonérées d’impôt en vertu d’un régime visé aux articles 403(b) ou 457(b) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






gg) The term “Entity” means a legal person or a legal arrangement such as a trust.





gg) Le terme « entité » désigne une personne morale ou une construction juridique telle qu’une fiducie.






hh) The term “Non-U.S. Entity” means an Entity that is not a U.S. Person.





hh) Le terme « entité non américaine » désigne une entité qui n’est pas une personne des États-Unis.






ii) The term “U.S. Source Withholdable Payment” means any payment of interest (including any original issue discount), dividends, rents, salaries, wages, premiums, annuities, compensations, remunerations, emoluments, and other fixed or determinable annual or periodical gains, profits, and income, if such payment is from sources within the United States. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a U.S. Source Withholdable Payment does not include any payment that is not treated as a withholdable payment in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations.





ii) Le terme « paiement de source américaine assujetti à une retenue » désigne le paiement d’intérêts (y compris d’éventuelles primes d’émission), de dividendes, de loyers, de salaires, de traitements, de primes, de rentes, d’indemnités, de rémunérations, d’émoluments et d’autres gains, bénéfices et revenus fixes ou déterminables, annuels ou périodiques, lorsque ces paiements sont de source américaine. Malgré ce qui précède, sont exclus des paiements de source américaine assujettis à une retenue les paiements qui ne sont pas considérés comme étant assujettis à une retenue selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis.






jj) An Entity is a “Related Entity” of another Entity if either Entity controls the other Entity, or the two Entities are under common control. For this purpose control includes direct or indirect ownership of more than 50 percent of the vote or value in an Entity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Canada may treat an Entity as not a Related Entity of another Entity if the two Entities are not members of the same expanded affiliated group as defined in section 1471(e)(2) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.





jj) Une entité est une « entité liée » à une autre entité si l’une des deux entités contrôle l’autre ou si les deux entités sont sous contrôle commun. À cette fin, le contrôle comprend la détention directe ou indirecte de plus de 50 p. 100 des droits de vote ou de la valeur d’une entité. Malgré ce qui précède, le Canada n’est pas tenu de considérer comme des entités liées deux entités qui ne font pas partie du même groupe affilié élargi, au sens donné au terme « expanded affiliated group » à l’article 1471(e)(2) de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






kk) The term “U.S. TIN” means a U.S. federal taxpayer identifying number.





kk) Le terme « NIF américain » désigne un numéro d’identification fiscal fédéral américain.






ll) The term “Canadian TIN” means a Canadian taxpayer identifying number.





ll) Le terme « NIF canadien » désigne un numéro d’identification fiscal canadien.






mm) The term “Controlling Persons” means the natural persons who exercise control over an Entity. In the case of a trust, such term means the settlor, the trustees, the protector (if any), the beneficiaries or class of beneficiaries, and any other natural person exercising ultimate effective control over the trust, and in the case of a legal arrangement other than a trust, such term means persons in equivalent or similar positions. The term “Controlling Persons” shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the Financial Action Task Force Recommendations.





mm) Le terme « personnes détenant le contrôle » désigne les personnes physiques qui contrôlent une entité. Dans le cas d’une fiducie, ce terme désigne l’auteur, les fiduciaires, un éventuel protecteur, les bénéficiaires ou la catégorie de bénéficiaires et toute autre personne physique exerçant en dernier lieu un contrôle effectif sur la fiducie. Pour toute autre construction juridique, le terme désigne les personnes dont la situation est équivalente ou similaire. Le terme « personnes détenant le contrôle » est interprété conformément aux recommandations du Groupe d’action financière.






2. Any term not otherwise defined in this Agreement shall, unless the context otherwise requires or the Competent Authorities agree to a common meaning (as permitted by domestic law), have the meaning that it has at that time under the law of the Party applying this Agreement, any meaning under the applicable tax laws of that Party prevailing over a meaning given to the term under other laws of that Party.





2. Tout terme qui n’est pas défini dans le présent Accord a, sauf indication contraire du contexte ou si les autorités compétentes s’entendent sur une signification commune conforme au droit interne, le sens que lui attribue au moment considéré le droit de la partie qui applique le présent Accord, le sens attribué à ce terme par la législation fiscale de cette partie prévalant sur le sens que lui attribuent les autres branches du droit de cette partie.






ARTICLE 2 





ARTICLE 2 






Obligations to Obtain and Exchange Information with Respect to Reportable Accounts





Obligations d’obtenir et d’échanger des renseignements concernant les comptes déclarables






1. Subject to the provisions of Article 3 of this Agreement, each Party shall obtain the information specified in paragraph 2 of this Article with respect to all Reportable Accounts and shall annually exchange this information with the other Party on an automatic basis pursuant to the provisions of Article XXVII of the Convention.





1. Sous réserve des dispositions de l’article 3 du présent Accord, chaque partie obtient les renseignements visés au paragraphe 2 du présent article pour tous les comptes déclarables et elle échange ces renseignements chaque année avec l’autre partie de manière automatique conformément aux dispositions de l’article XXVII de la Convention.






2. The information to be obtained and exchanged is:





2. Les renseignements à obtenir et à échanger sont les suivants :






a) In the case of Canada with respect to each U.S. Reportable Account of each Reporting Canadian Financial Institution:





a) Dans le cas du Canada, pour chaque compte déclarable américain de chaque institution financière canadienne déclarante :






(1) the name, address, and U.S. TIN of each Specified U.S. Person that is an Account Holder of such account and, in the case of a Non-U.S. Entity that, after application of the due diligence procedures set forth in Annex I, is identified as having one or more Controlling Persons that is a Specified U.S. Person, the name, address, and U.S. TIN (if any) of such Entity and each such Specified U.S. Person;





(1) le nom, l’adresse et le NIF américain de chaque personne désignée des États-Unis qui est titulaire du compte et, dans le cas d’une entité non américaine pour laquelle, après application des procédures de diligence raisonnable prévues à l’annexe I, il apparaît qu’une ou plusieurs personnes détenant le contrôle sont des personnes désignées des États-Unis, le nom, l’adresse et le NIF américain (le cas échéant) de cette entité et de chacune de ces personnes désignées des États-Unis;






(2) the account number (or functional equivalent in the absence of an account number);





(2) le numéro de compte (ou son équivalent fonctionnel en l’absence de numéro de compte);






(3) the name and identifying number of the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution;





(3) le nom et le numéro d’identification de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante;






(4) the account balance or value (including, in the case of a Cash Value Insurance Contract or Annuity Contract, the Cash Value or surrender value) as of the end of the relevant calendar year or other appropriate reporting period or, if the account was closed during such year, immediately before closure;





(4) le solde ou la valeur du compte (y compris, dans le cas d’un contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou d’un contrat de rente, la valeur de rachat) à la fin de l’année civile considérée ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate ou, si le compte a été clôturé au cours de l’année en cause, immédiatement avant la clôture;






(5) in the case of any Custodial Account:





(5) dans le cas d’un compte de dépositaire :






(A) the total gross amount of interest, the total gross amount of dividends, and the total gross amount of other income generated with respect to the assets held in the account, in each case paid or credited to the account (or with respect to the account) during the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period; and





A) le montant brut total des intérêts, le montant brut total des dividendes et le montant brut total des autres revenus découlant des actifs détenus dans le compte, qui dans chaque cas ont été versés ou crédités sur le compte (ou au titre du compte) au cours de l’année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate,






(B) the total gross proceeds from the sale or redemption of property paid or credited to the account during the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period with respect to which the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution acted as a custodian, broker, nominee, or otherwise as an agent for the Account Holder;





B) le produit brut total de la vente ou du rachat d’un bien, versé ou crédité sur le compte au cours de l’année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate pour laquelle l’institution financière canadienne déclarante a agi en tant que dépositaire, courtier, prête-nom ou représentant du titulaire du compte;






(6) in the case of any Depository Account, the total gross amount of interest paid or credited to the account during the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period; and





(6) dans le cas d’un compte de dépôt, le montant brut total des intérêts versés ou crédités sur le compte au cours de l’année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate;






(7) in the case of any account not described in subparagraph 2(a)(5) or 2(a)(6) of this Article, the total gross amount paid or credited to the Account Holder with respect to the account during the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period with respect to which the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is the obligor or debtor, including the aggregate amount of any redemption payments made to the Account Holder during the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period.





(7) dans le cas d’un compte qui n’est pas visé aux sous-alinéas 2a)(5) ou (6) du présent article, le montant brut total versé au titulaire du compte, ou porté à son crédit, relativement au compte au cours de l’année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate dont l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est l’obligée ou la débitrice, y compris le total des sommes remboursées au titulaire du compte au cours de cette année ou de cette période.






b) In the case of the United States, with respect to each Canadian Reportable Account of each Reporting U.S. Financial Institution:





b) Dans le cas des États-Unis, pour chaque compte déclarable canadien de chaque institution financière américaine déclarante :






(1) the name, address, and Canadian TIN of any person that is a resident of Canada and is an Account Holder of the account;





(1) le nom, l’adresse et le NIF canadien de toute personne qui est un résident du Canada et titulaire du compte;






(2) the account number (or the functional equivalent in the absence of an account number);





(2) le numéro de compte (ou son équivalent fonctionnel en l’absence de numéro de compte);






(3) the name and identifying number of the Reporting U.S. Financial Institution;





(3) le nom et le numéro d’identification de l’institution financière américaine déclarante;






(4) the gross amount of interest paid on a Depository Account;





(4) le montant brut des intérêts versés sur un compte de dépôt;






(5) the gross amount of U.S. source dividends paid or credited to the account; and





(5) le montant brut des dividendes de source américaine versés ou crédités sur le compte;






(6) the gross amount of other U.S. source income paid or credited to the account, to the extent subject to reporting under chapter 3 of subtitle A or chapter 61 of subtitle F of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.





(6) le montant brut des autres revenus de source américaine versés ou crédités sur le compte, dans la mesure où ils sont assujettis aux obligations de déclaration prévues au chapitre 3 du sous-titre A de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis ou au chapitre 61 du sous-titre F de ce code.






ARTICLE 3 





ARTICLE 3 






Time and Manner of Exchange of Information





Calendrier et modalités des échanges de renseignements






1. For purposes of the exchange obligation in Article 2 of this Agreement, the amount and characterization of payments made with respect to a U.S. Reportable Account may be determined in accordance with the principles of Canada’s tax laws, and the amount and characterization of payments made with respect to a Canadian Reportable Account may be determined in accordance with principles of U.S. federal income tax law.





1. Aux fins de l’obligation d’échange prévue à l’article 2 du présent Accord, le montant et la qualification des versements effectués au titre d’un compte déclarable américain peuvent être déterminés conformément aux principes de la législation fiscale canadienne, et le montant et la qualification des versements effectués au titre d’un compte déclarable canadien peuvent être déterminés conformément aux principes du droit fédéral américain en matière d’impôt sur le revenu.






2. For purposes of the exchange obligation in Article 2 of this Agreement, the information exchanged shall identify the currency in which each relevant amount is denominated.





2. Aux fins de l’obligation d’échange prévue à l’article 2 du présent Accord, les renseignements échangés précisent la monnaie dans laquelle chaque somme en cause est libellée.






3. With respect to paragraph 2 of Article 2 of this Agreement, information is to be obtained and exchanged with respect to 2014 and all subsequent years, except that:





3. En ce qui concerne le paragraphe 2 de l’article 2 du présent Accord, les renseignements doivent être obtenus et échangés pour 2014 et les années subséquentes. Toutefois :






a) In the case of Canada:





a) dans le cas du Canada :






(1) the information to be obtained and exchanged with respect to 2014 is only the information described in subparagraphs 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(4) of Article 2 of this Agreement;





(1) les renseignements à obtenir et à échanger pour 2014 se limitent à ceux visés aux sous-alinéas 2a)(1) à (4) de l’article 2 du présent Accord,






(2) the information to be obtained and exchanged with respect to 2015 is the information described in subparagraphs 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(7) of Article 2 of this Agreement, except for gross proceeds described in subparagraph 2(a)(5)(B) of Article 2 of this Agreement; and





(2) les renseignements à obtenir et à échanger pour 2015 sont ceux visés aux sous-alinéas 2a)(1) à (7) de l’article 2 du présent Accord, exception faite du produit brut visé au sous-alinéa 2a)(5)(B) de cet article,






(3) the information to be obtained and exchanged with respect to 2016 and subsequent years is the information described in subparagraphs 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(7) of Article 2 of this Agreement;





(3) les renseignements à obtenir et à échanger pour 2016 et les années subséquentes sont ceux visés aux sous-alinéas 2a)(1) à (7) de l’article 2 du présent Accord;






b) In the case of the United States, the information to be obtained and exchanged with respect to 2014 and subsequent years is all of the information identified in subparagraph 2(b) of Article 2 of this Agreement.





b) dans le cas des États-Unis, les renseignements à obtenir et à échanger pour 2014 et les années subséquentes sont ceux visés à l’alinéa 2b) de l’article 2 du présent Accord.






4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 of this Article, with respect to each Reportable Account that is maintained by a Reporting Financial Institution as of June 30, 2014, and subject to paragraph 4 of Article 6 of this Agreement, the Parties are not required to obtain and include in the exchanged information the Canadian TIN or the U.S. TIN, as applicable, of any relevant person if such taxpayer identifying number is not in the records of the Reporting Financial Institution. In such a case, the Parties shall obtain and include in the exchanged information the date of birth of the relevant person, if the Reporting Financial Institution has such date of birth in its records.





4. Malgré le paragraphe 3 du présent article, s’agissant d’un compte déclarable qui est détenu auprès d’une institution financière déclarante au 30 juin 2014, et sous réserve du paragraphe 4 de l’article 6 du présent Accord, les parties ne sont pas tenues d’obtenir, et d’intégrer aux renseignements échangés, le NIF canadien ou le NIF américain, selon le cas, de toute personne concernée si ce numéro ne figure pas dans les registres de l’institution financière déclarante. Dans ce cas, les parties obtiennent, et intègrent aux renseignements échangés, la date de naissance de la personne concernée si cette date figure dans les registres de l’institution financière déclarante.






5. Subject to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article, the information described in Article 2 of this Agreement shall be exchanged within nine months after the end of the calendar year to which the information relates.





5. Sous réserve des paragraphes 3 et 4 du présent article, les renseignements visés à l’article 2 du présent Accord sont échangés dans les neuf mois qui suivent la fin de l’année civile à laquelle ils se rapportent.






6. The Competent Authorities of Canada and the United States shall enter into an agreement or arrangement under the mutual agreement procedure provided for in Article XXVI of the Convention, which shall:





6. Les autorités compétentes du Canada et des États-Unis concluront, dans le cadre de la procédure amiable prévue à l’article XXVI de la Convention, un accord ou un arrangement prévoyant :






a) establish the procedures for the automatic exchange obligations described in Article 2 of this Agreement;





a) les procédures relatives aux obligations d’échange automatique visées à l’article 2 du présent Accord;






b) prescribe rules and procedures as may be necessary to implement Article 5 of this Agreement; and





b) les règles et les procédures pouvant être nécessaires à la mise en œuvre de l’article 5 du présent Accord;






c) establish as necessary procedures for the exchange of the information reported under subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of this Agreement.





c) au besoin, les procédures pour l’échange des renseignements déclarés en application de l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 du présent Accord.






7. All information exchanged shall be subject to the confidentiality and other protections provided for in the Convention, including the provisions limiting the use of the information exchanged.





7. Tous les renseignements échangés sont assujettis aux obligations de confidentialité et autres garanties prévues par la Convention, y compris les dispositions qui en limitent l’utilisation.






ARTICLE 4 





ARTICLE 4 






Application of FATCA to Canadian Financial Institutions





Application de la loi FATCA aux institutions financières canadiennes






1. Treatment of Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions: Each Reporting Canadian Financial Institution shall be treated as complying with, and not subject to withholding under, section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code if Canada complies with its obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of this Agreement with respect to such Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, and the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution:





1. Traitement des institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes : Chaque institution financière canadienne déclarante est considérée comme étant en conformité avec l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis et exonérée de la retenue prévue par cet article si le Canada respecte ses obligations prévues aux articles 2 et 3 du présent Accord relativement à l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en cause et que cette dernière :






a) identifies U.S. Reportable Accounts and reports annually to the Canadian Competent Authority the information required to be reported in subparagraph 2(a) of Article 2 of this Agreement in the time and manner described in Article 3 of this Agreement;





a) recense les comptes déclarables américains et fournit chaque année à l’autorité compétente du Canada les renseignements visés à l’alinéa 2a) de l’article 2 du présent Accord, dans les délais et selon les modalités prévus à l’article 3 du présent Accord;






b) for each of 2015 and 2016, reports annually to the Canadian Competent Authority the name of each Nonparticipating Financial Institution to which it has made payments and the aggregate amount of such payments;





b) fournit annuellement à l’autorité compétente du Canada, pour chacune des années 2015 et 2016, le nom de chaque institution financière non participante à laquelle elle a fait des paiements ainsi que le total de ces paiements;






c) complies with the applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website;





c) respecte les obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA;






d) to the extent that a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is:





d) prélève 30 p. 100 sur tout paiement de source américaine assujetti à une retenue, fait à une institution financière non participante, dans la mesure où, selon le cas :






(1) acting as a qualified intermediary (for purposes of section 1441 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code) that has elected to assume primary withholding responsibility under chapter 3 of subtitle A of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code,





(1) elle agit en tant qu’intermédiaire agréé (qualified intermediary), pour l’application de l’article 1441 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis, qui a choisi d’assumer la principale responsabilité en matière de retenue en application du chapitre 3 du sous-titre A de ce code,






(2) a foreign partnership that has elected to act as a withholding foreign partnership (for purposes of both sections 1441 and 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code), or





(2) elle est une société de personnes étrangère qui a choisi d’agir à titre de société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign partnership) pour l’application des articles 1441 et 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis,






(3) a foreign trust that has elected to act as a withholding foreign trust (for purposes of both sections 1441 and 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code),





(3) elle est une fiducie étrangère qui a choisi d’agir à titre de fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign trust) pour l’application des articles 1441 et 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis;






withholds 30 percent of any U.S. Source Withholdable Payment to any Nonparticipating Financial Institution; and





e) s’agissant d’une institution financière canadienne déclarante qui n’est pas visée à l’alinéa 1d) du présent article et qui effectue un paiement de source américaine assujetti à une retenue à une institution financière non participante ou qui agit en tant qu’intermédiaire dans le cadre d’un tel paiement, fournit à toute personne qui procède directement à un tel paiement les renseignements nécessaires pour que la retenue et les déclarations concernant ce paiement puissent être effectuées.






e) in the case of a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution that is not described in subparagraph 1(d) of this Article and that makes a payment of, or acts as an intermediary with respect to, a U.S. Source Withholdable Payment to any Nonparticipating Financial Institution, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution provides to any immediate payor of such U.S. Source Withholdable Payment the information required for withholding and reporting to occur with respect to such payment.





Malgré ce qui précède, une institution financière canadienne déclarante à l’égard de laquelle les conditions énoncées au présent paragraphe 1 ne sont pas remplies n’est assujettie à la retenue prévue à l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis que si l’IRS considère, aux termes de l’alinéa 2b) de l’article 5 du présent Accord, qu’elle est une institution financière non participante.






Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution with respect to which the conditions of this paragraph 1 are not satisfied shall not be subject to withholding under section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code unless such Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is treated by the IRS as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution pursuant to subparagraph 2(b) of Article 5 of this Agreement.





2. Suspension des règles relatives aux comptes de titulaires récalcitrants : Les États-Unis n’exigent pas d’une institution financière canadienne déclarante qu’elle effectue une retenue d’impôt en application des articles 1471 ou 1472 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis relativement à un compte détenu par un titulaire de compte récalcitrant (au sens donné au terme « recalcitrant account holder » à l’article 1471(d)(6) de ce code), ou qu’elle clôture un tel compte, si l’autorité compétente des États-Unis reçoit les renseignements visés à l’alinéa 2a) de l’article 2 du présent Accord, sous réserve des dispositions de l’article 3 du présent Accord, concernant ce compte.






2. Suspension of Rules Relating to Recalcitrant Accounts: The United States shall not require a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution to withhold tax under section 1471 or 1472 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code with respect to an account held by a recalcitrant account holder (as defined in section 1471(d)(6) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code), or to close such account, if the U.S. Competent Authority receives the information set forth in subparagraph 2(a) of Article 2 of this Agreement, subject to the provisions of Article 3 of this Agreement, with respect to such account.





3. Traitement particulier des régimes de retraite canadiens : Les États-Unis considèrent les régimes de retraite canadiens figurant à l’annexe II comme étant, selon le cas, des IFE réputées conformes (deemed-compliant FFI) ou des bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés (exempt beneficial owner) pour l’application des articles 1471 et 1472 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis. À cette fin, sont comprises parmi les régimes de retraite canadiens une entité établie ou située au Canada, et régie par ses lois, et une construction contractuelle ou juridique préétablie qui est administrée dans le but de verser des prestations de pension ou de retraite, ou de gagner un revenu servant au versement de telles prestations, en application de la législation du Canada et qui est assujettie à la réglementation concernant les cotisations, les distributions, les déclarations, les promoteurs et la fiscalité.






3. Specific Treatment of Canadian Retirement Plans: The United States shall treat as deemed-compliant FFIs or exempt beneficial owners, as appropriate, for purposes of sections 1471 and 1472 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, Canadian retirement plans identified in Annex II. For this purpose, a Canadian retirement plan includes an Entity established or located in, and regulated by, Canada, or a predetermined contractual or legal arrangement, operated to provide pension or retirement benefits or earn income for providing such benefits under the laws of Canada and regulated with respect to contributions, distributions, reporting, sponsorship, and taxation.





4. Identification et traitement d’autres IFE réputées conformes et bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés : Les États-Unis considèrent chaque institution financière canadienne non déclarante comme étant, selon le cas, une IFE réputée conforme (deemed-compliant FFI) ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner) pour l’application de l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






4. Identification and Treatment of Other Deemed-Compliant FFIs and Exempt Beneficial Owners: The United States shall treat each Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institution as a deemed-compliant FFI or as an exempt beneficial owner, as appropriate, for purposes of section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.





5. Règles spécifiques concernant les entités liées et les succursales qui sont des institutions financières non participantes : Une institution financière canadienne satisfaisant par ailleurs aux critères fixés au paragraphe 1 du présent article ou visée aux paragraphes 3 ou 4 du présent article qui a une entité liée ou une succursale exerçant des activités dans un territoire qui ne permet pas à cette entité liée ou à cette succursale de satisfaire aux critères visant les IFE participantes (participating FFI) ou les IFE réputées conformes (deemed-compliant FFI) pour l’application de l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis, ou qui a une entité liée ou une succursale qui est considérée comme une institution financière non participante en raison seulement de l’expiration de la règle transitoire applicable aux IFE limitées (limited FFI) et aux succursales limitées (limited branch) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, continue d’être en conformité avec les dispositions du présent Accord et d’être considérée comme une IFE réputée conforme ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner) pour l’application de l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis si les conditions ci-après sont réunies :






5. Special Rules Regarding Related Entities and Branches That Are Nonparticipating Financial Institutions: If a Canadian Financial Institution, that otherwise meets the requirements described in paragraph 1 of this Article or is described in paragraph 3 or 4 of this Article, has a Related Entity or branch that operates in a jurisdiction that prevents such Related Entity or branch from fulfilling the requirements of a participating FFI or deemed-compliant FFI for purposes of section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code or has a Related Entity or branch that is treated as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution solely due to the expiration of the transitional rule for limited FFIs and limited branches under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations, such Canadian Financial Institution shall continue to be in compliance with the terms of this Agreement and shall continue to be treated as a deemed-compliant FFI or exempt beneficial owner, as appropriate, for purposes of section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, provided that:





a) l’institution financière canadienne traite chacune de ces entités liées ou succursales comme une institution financière non participante distincte pour l’application des exigences en matière de déclaration et de retenue prévues au présent Accord, et chacune de ces entités liées ou succursales indique aux mandataires effectuant la retenue (withholding agents) qu’elle est une institution financière non participante;






a) the Canadian Financial Institution treats each such Related Entity or branch as a separate Nonparticipating Financial Institution for purposes of all the reporting and withholding requirements of this Agreement and each such Related Entity or branch identifies itself to withholding agents as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution;





b) chacune de ces entités liées ou succursales recense ses comptes américains et fournit les renseignements concernant ces comptes conformément à l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis dans la mesure permise par la législation qui lui est applicable;






b) each such Related Entity or branch identifies its U.S. accounts and reports the information with respect to those accounts as required under section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code to the extent permitted under the relevant laws pertaining to the Related Entity or branch; and





c) chacune de ces entités liées ou succursales n’effectue pas de démarches particulières concernant les comptes américains détenus par des personnes qui ne résident pas dans le territoire où elle est située ou concernant les comptes auprès d’institutions financières non participantes qui ne sont pas établies dans ce territoire, et ces entités liées ou succursales ne sont pas utilisées par l’institution financière canadienne ou par toute autre entité liée pour contrevenir aux obligations prévues au présent Accord ou à l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






c) such Related Entity or branch does not specifically solicit U.S. accounts held by persons that are not resident in the jurisdiction where such Related Entity or branch is located or accounts held by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions that are not established in the jurisdiction where such branch or Related Entity is located, and such branch or Related Entity is not used by the Canadian Financial Institution or any other Related Entity to circumvent the obligations under this Agreement or under section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, as appropriate.





6. Coordination du calendrier : Malgré les paragraphes 3 et 5 de l’article 3 du présent Accord :






6. Coordination of Timing: Notwithstanding paragraphs 3 and 5 of Article 3 of this Agreement:





a) le Canada n’est pas tenu d’obtenir et d’échanger des renseignements relatifs à une année civile antérieure à celle pour laquelle des IFE participantes doivent fournir à l’IRS des renseignements similaires conformément aux dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






a) Canada shall not be obligated to obtain and exchange information with respect to a calendar year that is prior to the calendar year with respect to which similar information is required to be reported to the IRS by participating FFIs pursuant to relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





b) le Canada n’est pas tenu de commencer à échanger des renseignements avant la date à laquelle des IFE participantes doivent fournir à l’IRS des renseignements similaires conformément aux dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






b) Canada shall not be obligated to begin exchanging information prior to the date by which participating FFIs are required to report similar information to the IRS under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





c) les États-Unis ne sont pas tenus d’obtenir et d’échanger des renseignements relatifs à une année civile antérieure à la première année civile pour laquelle le Canada est tenu d’obtenir et d’échanger des renseignements;






c) the United States shall not be obligated to obtain and exchange information with respect to a calendar year that is prior to the first calendar year with respect to which Canada is required to obtain and exchange information; and





d) les États-Unis ne sont pas tenus de commencer à échanger des renseignements avant la date à laquelle le Canada est tenu de le faire.






d) the United States shall not be obligated to begin exchanging information prior to the date by which Canada is required to begin exchanging information.





7. Coordination des définitions avec les Treasury Regulations des États-Unis : Malgré l’article premier du présent Accord et les définitions figurant dans ses annexes, lors de la mise en œuvre du présent Accord, le Canada peut appliquer, et permettre aux institutions financières canadiennes d’appliquer, une définition figurant dans les Treasury Regulations des États-Unis au lieu de la définition correspondante figurant au présent Accord, pourvu que pareille application ne fasse pas échec à l’objectif du présent Accord.






7. Coordination of Definitions with U.S. Treasury Regulations: Notwithstanding Article 1 of this Agreement and the definitions provided in the Annexes to this Agreement, in implementing this Agreement, Canada may use, and may permit Canadian Financial Institutions to use, a definition in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations in lieu of a corresponding definition in this Agreement, provided that such application would not frustrate the purposes of this Agreement.





ARTICLE 5 






ARTICLE 5 





Collaboration en matière d’observation et d’application






Collaboration on Compliance and Enforcement





1. Erreurs mineures ou erreurs administratives : L’autorité compétente d’une des parties avise l’autorité compétente de l’autre partie lorsqu’elle a des raisons de croire que des erreurs administratives ou d’autres erreurs mineures pourraient avoir entraîné la transmission de renseignements erronés ou incomplets ou d’autres formes de manquement au présent Accord. L’autorité compétente de l’autre partie s’efforce alors d’obtenir les renseignements exacts ou complets ou de régler les manquements, notamment en appliquant, s’il y a lieu, son droit interne, y compris les pénalités applicables.






1. Minor and Administrative Errors: A Competent Authority shall notify the Competent Authority of the other Party when the first-mentioned Competent Authority has reason to believe that administrative errors or other minor errors may have led to incorrect or incomplete information reporting or resulted in other infringements of this Agreement. The Competent Authority of such other Party shall endeavor, including where appropriate by applying its domestic law (including applicable penalties), to obtain corrected and/or complete information or to resolve other infringements of this Agreement.





2. Infraction significative :






2. Significant Non-Compliance:





a) Si l’autorité compétente de l’une des parties établit l’existence d’une infraction significative aux obligations prévues au présent Accord de la part d’une institution financière déclarante de l’autre territoire, elle en avise l’autorité compétente de l’autre partie, laquelle applique son droit interne (y compris les pénalités applicables) pour remédier à l’infraction mentionnée dans l’avis à cet égard.






a) A Competent Authority shall notify the Competent Authority of the other Party when the first-mentioned Competent Authority has determined that there is significant non-compliance with the obligations under this Agreement with respect to a Reporting Financial Institution in the other jurisdiction. The Competent Authority of such other Party shall apply its domestic law (including applicable penalties) to address the significant non-compliance described in the notice.





b) Si, dans le cas d’une institution financière canadienne déclarante, les mesures coercitives qui ont été appliquées ne mettent pas fin à l’infraction significative dans un délai de dix-huit mois suivant la date où l’avis d’infraction significative a d’abord été transmis, les États-Unis traitent l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en cause comme une institution financière non participante en application du présent alinéa b).






b) If, in the case of a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, such enforcement actions do not resolve the non-compliance within a period of 18 months after notification of significant non-compliance is first provided, the United States shall treat the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution pursuant to this subparagraph 2(b).





3. Recours à des tiers prestataires de services : Chaque partie peut autoriser les institutions financières déclarantes à faire appel à des tiers prestataires de services pour l’exécution des obligations qu’une partie leur impose en vertu du présent Accord, mais ces obligations restent du domaine de la responsabilité des institutions financières déclarantes.






3. Reliance on Third Party Service Providers: Each Party may allow Reporting Financial Institutions to use third party service providers to fulfill the obligations imposed on such Reporting Financial Institutions by a Party, as contemplated in this Agreement, but these obligations shall remain the responsibility of the Reporting Financial Institutions.





4. Dispositif anti-évitement : Les parties mettent en œuvre au besoin des mesures afin d’empêcher les institutions financières de recourir à des pratiques leur permettant de contrevenir aux obligations de déclaration prévues au présent Accord.






4. Prevention of Avoidance: The Parties shall implement as necessary requirements to prevent Financial Institutions from adopting practices intended to circumvent the reporting required under this Agreement.





ARTICLE 6 






ARTICLE 6 





Engagement réciproque à continuer d’améliorer l’efficacité de l’échange de renseignements et la transparence






Mutual Commitment to Continue to Enhance the Effectiveness of Information Exchange and Transparency





1. Réciprocité : Le gouvernement des États-Unis reconnaît la nécessité de parvenir à des niveaux équivalents d’échange réciproque et automatique de renseignements avec le Canada et s’engage à améliorer davantage la transparence et à renforcer la relation d’échange avec le Canada en continuant à adopter des mesures réglementaires et en préconisant et en soutenant l’adoption de lois appropriées afin d’atteindre ces niveaux équivalents d’échange réciproque et automatique de renseignements.






1. Reciprocity: The Government of the United States acknowledges the need to achieve equivalent levels of reciprocal automatic information exchange with Canada. The Government of the United States is committed to further improve transparency and enhance the exchange relationship with Canada by pursuing the adoption of regulations and advocating and supporting relevant legislation to achieve such equivalent levels of reciprocal automatic information exchange.





2. Traitement des paiements indirects (passthru payments) et des produits bruts : Les parties s’engagent à travailler de concert, ainsi qu’avec des juridictions partenaires, afin d’élaborer une méthode de rechange pratique et efficace permettant d’atteindre, en occasionnant le moins de charges possible, les objectifs visés pour la retenue à opérer sur les paiements indirects et produits bruts étrangers.






2. Treatment of Passthru Payments and Gross Proceeds: The Parties are committed to work together, along with Partner Jurisdictions, to develop a practical and effective alternative approach to achieve the policy objectives of foreign passthru payment and gross proceeds withholding that minimizes burden.





3. Développement d’un modèle commun de déclaration et d’échange de renseignements : Les parties s’engagent à travailler avec des juridictions partenaires et avec l’Organisation de coopération et de développement économiques à l’adaptation des dispositions du présent Accord et d’autres accords conclus entre les États-Unis et des juridictions partenaires afin de réaliser un modèle commun d’échange automatique de renseignements, incluant des normes de déclaration et de diligence raisonnable pour les institutions financières.






3. Development of Common Reporting and Exchange Model: The Parties are committed to working with Partner Jurisdictions and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on adapting the terms of this Agreement and other agreements between the United States and Partner Jurisdictions to a common model for automatic exchange of information, including the development of reporting and due diligence standards for financial institutions.





4. Données concernant les comptes existants au 30 juin 2014 : En ce qui concerne les comptes déclarables détenus auprès d’une institution financière déclarante au 30 juin 2014 :






4. Documentation of Accounts Maintained as of June 30, 2014: With respect to Reportable Accounts maintained by a Reporting Financial Institution as of June 30, 2014:





a) les États-Unis s’engagent à adopter, au plus tard le 1er janvier 2017, relativement aux déclarations visant 2017 et les années subséquentes, des règles exigeant des institutions financières américaines déclarantes qu’elles obtiennent et déclarent le NIF canadien de chaque titulaire de compte déclarable canadien conformément au sous-alinéa 2b)(1) de l’article 2 du présent Accord;






a) The United States commits to establish, by January 1, 2017, for reporting with respect to 2017 and subsequent years, rules requiring Reporting U.S. Financial Institutions to obtain and report the Canadian TIN of each Account Holder of a Canadian Reportable Account as required pursuant to subparagraph 2(b)(1) of Article 2 of this Agreement; and





b) le Canada s’engage à adopter, au plus tard le 1er janvier 2017, relativement aux déclarations visant 2017 et les années subséquentes, des règles exigeant des institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes qu’elles obtiennent le NIF américain de chaque personne désignée des États-Unis conformément au sous-alinéa 2a)(1) de l’article 2 du présent Accord.






b) Canada commits to establish, by January 1, 2017, for reporting with respect to 2017 and subsequent years, rules requiring Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions to obtain the U.S. TIN of each Specified U.S. Person as required pursuant to subparagraph 2(a)(1) of Article 2 of this Agreement.





ARTICLE 7 






ARTICLE 7 





Application cohérente de la loi FATCA aux juridictions partenaires






Consistency in the Application of FATCA to Partner Jurisdictions





1. En ce qui concerne l’application de la loi FATCA aux institutions financières canadiennes, le Canada bénéficie des conditions plus favorables accordées, en application de l’article 4 ou de l’annexe I du présent Accord, à une autre juridiction partenaire dans le cadre d’un accord bilatéral signé, aux termes duquel l’autre juridiction partenaire s’engage à respecter les mêmes obligations que le Canada, visées aux articles 2 et 3 du présent Accord, sous réserve des mêmes conditions visées à ces articles et aux articles 5 à 9 du présent Accord.






1. Canada shall be granted the benefit of any more favorable terms under Article 4 or Annex I of this Agreement relating to the application of FATCA to Canadian Financial Institutions afforded to another Partner Jurisdiction under a signed bilateral agreement pursuant to which the other Partner Jurisdiction commits to undertake the same obligations as Canada described in Articles 2 and 3 of this Agreement, and subject to the same terms and conditions as described therein and in Articles 5 through 9 of this Agreement.





2. Les États-Unis avisent le Canada de telles conditions plus favorables et ces dernières s’appliquent automatiquement dans le cadre du présent Accord, comme si elles y avaient été précisées, à compter de la date de la signature de l’accord prévoyant les conditions plus favorables, sauf si le Canada renonce à les appliquer.






2. The United States shall notify Canada of any such more favorable terms, and such more favorable terms shall apply automatically under this Agreement as if such terms were specified in this Agreement and effective as of the date of signing of the agreement incorporating the more favorable terms, unless Canada declines the application thereof.





ARTICLE 8 






ARTICLE 8 





Consultations et modifications






Consultations and Amendments





1. Dans le cas où le présent Accord soulèverait des difficultés de mise en œuvre, l’une ou l’autre des parties peut demander des consultations en vue d’élaborer des mesures propres à garantir l’exécution du présent Accord.






1. In case any difficulties in the implementation of this Agreement arise, either Party may request consultations to develop appropriate measures to ensure the fulfillment of this Agreement.





2. Les parties peuvent par consentement mutuel écrit modifier le présent Accord. Sauf disposition contraire, toute modification entre en vigueur selon la procédure fixée au paragraphe 1 de l’article 10 du présent Accord.






2. This Agreement may be amended by written mutual agreement of the Parties. Unless otherwise agreed upon, such an amendment shall enter into force through the same procedures as set forth in paragraph 1 of Article 10 of this Agreement.





ARTICLE 9 






ARTICLE 9 





Annexes






Annexes





Les annexes font partie intégrante du présent Accord.






The Annexes form an integral part of this Agreement.





ARTICLE 10 






ARTICLE 10 





Durée






Term of Agreement





1. Le présent Accord entre en vigueur à la date à laquelle le Canada notifie par écrit aux États-Unis l’achèvement de ses procédures internes requises pour l’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord.






1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of Canada’s written notification to the United States that Canada has completed its necessary internal procedures for entry into force of this Agreement.





2. Une partie peut dénoncer le présent Accord au moyen d’un avis de dénonciation écrit transmis à l’autre partie. La dénonciation prend effet le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’une période de douze mois suivant la date de l’avis de dénonciation.






2. Either Party may terminate this Agreement by giving notice of termination in writing to the other Party. Such termination shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of 12 months after the date of the notice of termination.





3. Avant le 31 décembre 2016, les parties engagent de bonne foi des consultations afin de modifier au besoin le présent Accord pour refléter les progrès accomplis concernant les engagements énoncés à l’article 6 du présent Accord.






3. The Parties shall, prior to December 31, 2016, consult in good faith to amend this Agreement as necessary to reflect progress on the commitments set forth in Article 6 of this Agreement.





EN FOI DE QUOI, les soussignés, dûment autorisés à cet effet par leur gouvernement respectif, ont signé le présent Accord.






IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.





FAIT en double exemplaire à Ottawa, le 5 février 2014, en langues française et anglaise, chaque version faisant également foi.






DONE in duplicate, at Ottawa, this 5th day of February 2014, in the English and French languages, each version being equally authentic.














POUR LE GOUVERNEMENT DU CANADA






FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA























POUR LE GOUVERNEMENT DES ÉTATS-UNIS D’AMÉRIQUE






FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA














ANNEXE I 






ANNEX I 





OBLIGATIONS DE DILIGENCE RAISONNABLE EN MATIÈRE D’IDENTIFICATION ET DE DÉCLARATION DE COMPTES DÉCLARABLES AMÉRICAINS ET DE PAIEMENTS EFFECTUÉS À CERTAINES INSTITUTIONS FINANCIÈRES NON PARTICIPANTES






DUE DILIGENCE OBLIGATIONS FOR IDENTIFYING AND REPORTING ON U.S. REPORTABLE ACCOUNTS AND ON PAYMENTS TO CERTAIN NONPARTICIPATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS





I. Généralités






I. General





A. Le Canada exige des institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes qu’elles recensent les comptes déclarables américains et les comptes détenus par des institutions financières non participantes selon les procédures de diligence raisonnable prévues dans la présente annexe I.






A. Canada shall require that Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions apply the due diligence procedures contained in this Annex I to identify U.S. Reportable Accounts and accounts held by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions.





B. Pour l’application de l’Accord :






B. For purposes of the Agreement,





1. Tous les montants en dollars américains et renvoient à leur contre-valeur en d’autres monnaies.






1. All dollar amounts are in U.S. dollars and shall be read to include the equivalent in other currencies.





2. Sauf disposition contraire, le solde ou la valeur d’un compte correspond à son solde ou à sa valeur le dernier jour de l’année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate.






2. Except as otherwise provided herein, the balance or value of an account shall be determined as of the last day of the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period.





3. Tout solde ou seuil de valeur à déterminer au 30 juin 2014 en application de la présente annexe I est déterminé à cette date ou au dernier jour de la période de déclaration se terminant immédiatement avant cette date, et tout solde ou seuil de valeur à déterminer au dernier jour d’une année civile en application de la présente annexe I est déterminé au dernier jour de l’année civile ou de toute autre période de déclaration adéquate.






3. Where a balance or value threshold is to be determined as of June 30, 2014, under this Annex I, the relevant balance or value shall be determined as of that day or the last day of the reporting period ending immediately before June 30, 2014, and where a balance or value threshold is to be determined as of the last day of a calendar year under this Annex I, the relevant balance or value shall be determined as of the last day of the calendar year or other appropriate reporting period.





4. Sous réserve du paragraphe 1 de la sous-section E de la section II de la présente annexe I, un compte est considéré comme un compte déclarable américain à partir de la date où il est identifié comme tel en application des procédures de diligence raisonnable prévues dans la présente annexe I.






4. Subject to subparagraph E(1) of section II of this Annex I, an account shall be treated as a U.S. Reportable Account beginning as of the date it is identified as such pursuant to the due diligence procedures in this Annex I.





5. Sauf disposition contraire, les renseignements relatifs à un compte déclarable américain sont déclarés annuellement, au cours de l’année civile qui suit celle à laquelle ils se rapportent.






5. Unless otherwise provided, information with respect to a U.S. Reportable Account shall be reported annually in the calendar year following the year to which the information relates.





C. Le Canada peut autoriser les institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes à appliquer, au lieu des procédures prévues à chaque section de la présente annexe I, celles qui figurent dans les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis afin d’établir si un compte est un compte déclarable américain ou un compte détenu par une institution financière non participante. Le Canada peut autoriser les institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes à faire un choix distinct en ce sens pour chaque section de la présente annexe I soit à l’égard de l’ensemble des comptes financiers en cause, soit séparément à l’égard d’un groupe de comptes financiers clairement identifié (par exemple, selon le secteur d’activité ou le lieu où le compte est tenu).






C. As an alternative to the procedures described in each section of this Annex I, Canada may permit Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions to rely on the procedures described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations to establish whether an account is a U.S. Reportable Account or an account held by a Nonparticipating Financial Institution. Canada may permit Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions to make such election separately for each section of this Annex I either with respect to all relevant Financial Accounts or, separately, with respect to any clearly identified group of such accounts (such as by line of business or the location of where the account is maintained).





II. Comptes de particuliers préexistants






II. Preexisting Individual Accounts





Les règles et procédures ci-après s’appliquent à l’identification de comptes déclarables américains parmi les comptes préexistants détenus par des personnes physiques (« comptes de particuliers préexistants »).






The following rules and procedures apply for purposes of identifying U.S. Reportable Accounts among Preexisting Accounts held by individuals (“Preexisting Individual Accounts”).





A. Comptes non assujettis à examen, à identification ou à déclaration : Sauf si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en fait le choix contraire, soit à l’égard de l’ensemble des comptes de particuliers préexistants, soit séparément à l’égard d’un groupe de ces comptes clairement identifié – à supposer que les règles de mise en œuvre du Canada lui en offrent la possibilité –, les comptes de particuliers préexistants ci-après n’ont pas à faire l’objet d’un examen, d’une identification ou d’une déclaration à titre de comptes déclarables américains :






A. Accounts Not Required to Be Reviewed, Identified, or Reported: Unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution elects otherwise, either with respect to all Preexisting Individual Accounts or, separately, with respect to any clearly identified group of such accounts, where the implementing rules in Canada provide for such an election, the following Preexisting Individual Accounts are not required to be reviewed, identified, or reported as U.S. Reportable Accounts:





1. Sous réserve du paragraphe 2 de la sous-section E de la présente section, les comptes de particuliers préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 n’excède pas 50 000 $.






1. Subject to subparagraph E(2) of this section, a Preexisting Individual Account with a balance or value that does not exceed $50,000 as of June 30, 2014.





2. Sous réserve du paragraphe 2 de la sous-section E de la présente section, les comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou des contrats de rente dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 n’excède pas 250 000 $.






2. Subject to subparagraph E(2) of this section, a Preexisting Individual Account that is a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract with a balance or value of $250,000 or less as of June 30, 2014.





3. Les comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou des contrats de rente, à condition que la législation ou la réglementation du Canada ou des États-Unis s’oppose à la vente de tels contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat ou contrats de rente à des résidents des États-Unis (par exemple, lorsque l’institution financière concernée ne dispose pas de l’enregistrement requis en droit américain et que le droit du Canada exige la déclaration ou une retenue relativement aux produits d’assurance détenus par des résidents du Canada).






3. A Preexisting Individual Account that is a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract, provided the law or regulations of Canada or the United States effectively prevent the sale of such a Cash Value Insurance Contract or an Annuity Contract to U.S. residents (e.g., if the relevant Financial Institution does not have the required registration under U.S. law, and the law of Canada requires reporting or withholding with respect to insurance products held by residents of Canada).





4. Les comptes de dépôt dont le solde n’excède pas 50 000 $.






4. A Depository Account with a balance of $50,000 or less.





B. Procédures d’examen des comptes de particuliers préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 excède 50 000 $ (250 000 $ pour les contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat et les contrats de rente), mais n’excède pas 1 000 000 $ (« comptes de faible valeur »)






B. Review Procedures for Preexisting Individual Accounts with a Balance or Value as of June 30, 2014, that Exceeds $50,000  ($250,000 for a Cash Value Insurance Contract or Annuity Contract), but Does Not Exceed $1,000,000 (“Lower Value Accounts”)





1. Examen par voie électronique






1. Electronic Record Search





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue d’examiner les données qu’elle détient et qui peuvent faire l’objet de recherches par voie électronique quant à la présence de l’un ou plusieurs des indices américains suivants :






The Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must review electronically searchable data maintained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution for any of the following U.S. indicia:





a) identification du titulaire du compte comme citoyen ou résident des États-Unis;






a) Identification of the Account Holder as a U.S. citizen or resident;





b) indication non équivoque d’un lieu de naissance situé aux États-Unis;






b) Unambiguous indication of a U.S. place of birth;





c) adresse postale ou de domicile actuelle aux États-Unis (y compris les boîtes postales américaines);






c) Current U.S. mailing or residence address (including a U.S. post office box);





d) numéro de téléphone actuel aux États-Unis;






d) Current U.S. telephone number;





e) ordre de virement permanent sur un compte aux États-Unis;






e) Standing instructions to transfer funds to an account maintained in the United States;





f) procuration ou délégation de signature en cours de validité accordée à une personne dont l’adresse est située aux États-Unis;






f) Currently effective power of attorney or signatory authority granted to a person with a U.S. address; or





g) adresse portant la mention « à l’attention de » ou « envoi à garder en instance » qui est l’unique adresse du titulaire du compte dont dispose l’institution financière canadienne déclarante; dans le cas d’un compte de particulier préexistant qui est un compte de faible valeur, une adresse portant la mention « à l’attention de » située hors des États-Unis ou une adresse portant la mention « envoi à garder en instance » ne constitue pas un indice américain.






g) An “in-care-of” or “hold mail” address that is the sole address the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution has on file for the Account Holder. In the case of a Preexisting Individual Account that is a Lower Value Account, an “in-care-of” address outside the United States or “hold mail” address shall not be treated as U.S. indicia.





2. Si l’examen des données par voie électronique ne révèle la présence d’aucun des indices américains énumérés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section, aucune nouvelle démarche n’est requise jusqu’à ce que se produise un changement de circonstances ayant pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains soient associés au compte ou que le compte devienne un compte de valeur élevée visé à la sous-section D de la présente section.






2. If none of the U.S. indicia listed in subparagraph B(1) of this section are discovered in the electronic search, then no further action is required until there is a change in circumstances that results in one or more U.S. indicia being associated with the account, or the account becomes a High Value Account described in paragraph D of this section.





3. Si l’examen des données par voie électronique révèle la présence de l’un quelconque des indices américains énumérés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section ou s’il se produit un changement de circonstances ayant pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains sont associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, à moins qu’elle ne choisisse d’appliquer le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section et que l’une des exceptions qui y figurent s’applique à ce compte.






3. If any of the U.S. indicia listed in subparagraph B(1) of this section are discovered in the electronic search, or if there is a change in circumstances that results in one or more U.S. indicia being associated with the account, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless it elects to apply subparagraph B(4) of this section and one of the exceptions in such subparagraph applies with respect to that account.





4. Malgré la découverte d’indices américains selon le paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante n’est pas tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain dans les cas suivants :






4. Notwithstanding a finding of U.S. indicia under subparagraph B(1) of this section, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is not required to treat an account as a U.S. Reportable Account if:





a) Si les renseignements sur le titulaire du compte contiennent l’indication non équivoque d’un lieu de naissance situé aux États-Unis, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante obtient, ou a auparavant examiné, et conserve une copie des documents suivants :






a) Where the Account Holder information unambiguously indicates a U.S. place of birth, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution obtains, or has previously reviewed and maintains a record of:





(1) une autocertification selon laquelle le titulaire du compte n’est ni citoyen ni résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales (établie sur le formulaire W-8 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu);






(1) A self-certification that the Account Holder is neither a U.S. citizen nor a U.S. resident for tax purposes (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or other similar agreed form);





(2) un passeport non américain ou une autre pièce d’identité délivrée par une autorité publique prouvant que le titulaire du compte possède la citoyenneté ou la nationalité d’un pays autre que les États-Unis; et






(2) A non-U.S. passport or other government-issued identification evidencing the Account Holder’s citizenship or nationality in a country other than the United States; and





(3) une copie du certificat de perte de la nationalité américaine établi pour le titulaire du compte ou une explication plausible de la raison pour laquelle le titulaire du compte :






(3) A copy of the Account Holder’s Certificate of Loss of Nationality of the United States or a reasonable explanation of:





a. ne dispose pas d’un tel certificat alors qu’il a renoncé à la citoyenneté américaine, ou






a. The reason the Account Holder does not have such a certificate despite relinquishing U.S. citizenship; or





b. n’a pas obtenu la citoyenneté américaine à sa naissance.






b. The reason the Account Holder did not obtain U.S. citizenship at birth.





b) Si les renseignements sur le titulaire du compte contiennent une adresse postale ou de domicile actuelle aux États-Unis ou un ou plusieurs numéros de téléphone aux États-Unis qui sont les seuls numéros de téléphone associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante obtient, ou a auparavant examiné, et conserve une copie des documents suivants :






b) Where the Account Holder information contains a current U.S. mailing or residence address, or one or more U.S. telephone numbers that are the only telephone numbers associated with the account, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution obtains, or has previously reviewed and maintains a record of:





(1) une autocertification selon laquelle le titulaire du compte n’est ni citoyen ni résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales (établie sur le formulaire W-8 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu); et






(1) A self-certification that the Account Holder is neither a U.S. citizen nor a U.S. resident for tax purposes (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or other similar agreed form); and





(2) une preuve documentaire visée à la sous-section D de la section VI de la présente annexe I, établissant le statut non américain du titulaire du compte.






(2) Documentary evidence, as defined in paragraph D of section VI of this Annex I, establishing the Account Holder’s non-U.S. status.





c) Si les renseignements sur le titulaire du compte contiennent un ordre de virement permanent sur un compte aux États-Unis, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante obtient, ou a auparavant examiné, et conserve une copie des documents suivants :






c) Where the Account Holder information contains standing instructions to transfer funds to an account maintained in the United States, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution obtains, or has previously reviewed and maintains a record of:





(1) une autocertification selon laquelle le titulaire du compte n’est ni citoyen ni résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales (établie sur le formulaire W-8 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu); et






(1) A self-certification that the Account Holder is neither a U.S. citizen nor a U.S. resident for tax purposes (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or other similar agreed form); and





(2) une preuve documentaire visée à la sous-section D de la section VI de la présente annexe I, établissant le statut non américain du titulaire du compte.






(2) Documentary evidence, as defined in paragraph D of section VI of this Annex I, establishing the Account Holder’s non-U.S. status.





d) Si les renseignements sur le titulaire du compte contiennent une procuration ou une délégation de signature en cours de validité accordée à une personne dont l’adresse est située aux États-Unis, une adresse portant la mention « à l’attention de » ou « envoi à garder en instance » qui est l’unique adresse connue pour le titulaire du compte ou un ou plusieurs numéros de téléphone aux États-Unis (si un numéro de téléphone non américain est également associé au compte), l’institution financière canadienne déclarante obtient, ou a auparavant examiné, et conserve une copie des documents suivants :






d) Where the Account Holder information contains a currently effective power of attorney or signatory authority granted to a person with a U.S. address, has an “in-care-of” address or “hold mail” address that is the sole address identified for the Account Holder, or has one or more U.S. telephone numbers (if a non-U.S. telephone number is also associated with the account), the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution obtains, or has previously reviewed and maintains a record of:





(1) une autocertification selon laquelle le titulaire du compte n’est ni citoyen ni résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales (établie sur le formulaire W-8 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu); ou






(1) A self-certification that the Account Holder is neither a U.S. citizen nor a U.S. resident for tax purposes (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or other similar agreed form); or





(2) une preuve documentaire visée à la sous-section D de la section VI de la présente annexe I, établissant le statut non américain du titulaire du compte.






(2) Documentary evidence, as defined in paragraph D of section VI of this Annex I, establishing the Account Holder’s non-U.S. status.





C. Procédures supplémentaires applicables aux comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des comptes de faible valeur






C. Additional Procedures Applicable to Preexisting Individual Accounts That Are Lower Value Accounts





1. L’examen des comptes de particuliers préexistants qui sont des comptes de faible valeur quant à la présence d’indices américains doit être achevé le 30 juin 2016 au plus tard.






1. Review of Preexisting Individual Accounts that are Lower Value Accounts for U.S. indicia must be completed by June 30, 2016.





2. Si un changement de circonstances concernant un compte de particulier préexistant qui est un compte de faible valeur a pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section sont associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, sauf si le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section s’applique.






2. If there is a change of circumstances with respect to a Preexisting Individual Account that is a Lower Value Account that results in one or more U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of this section being associated with the account, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless subparagraph B(4) of this section applies.





3. À l’exception des comptes de dépôt visés au paragraphe 4 de la sous-section A de la présente section, tout compte de particulier préexistant qui a été identifié comme compte déclarable américain en application de la présente section est considéré comme un compte déclarable américain durant toutes les années subséquentes, sauf si le titulaire du compte cesse d’être une personne désignée des États-Unis.






3. Except for Depository Accounts described in subparagraph A(4) of this section, any Preexisting Individual Account that has been identified as a U.S. Reportable Account under this section shall be treated as a U.S. Reportable Account in all subsequent years, unless the Account Holder ceases to be a Specified U.S. Person.





D. Procédures d’examen approfondi des comptes de particuliers préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014, ou au 31 décembre 2015 ou d’une année ultérieure, excède 1 000 000 $ (« comptes de valeur élevée »)






D. Enhanced Review Procedures for Preexisting Individual Accounts with a Balance or Value That Exceeds $1,000,000 as of June 30, 2014, or December 31, of 2015 or Any Subsequent Year (“High Value Accounts”)





1. Examen par voie électronique






1. Electronic Record Search





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue d’examiner les données qu’elle détient et qui peuvent faire l’objet de recherches par voie électronique quant à la présence des indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section.






The Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must review electronically searchable data maintained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution for any of the U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of this section.





2. Recherche dans les dossiers papier






2. Paper Record Search





Si les bases de données pouvant faire l’objet de recherches par voie électronique de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante contiennent des champs pour tous les renseignements visés au paragraphe 3 de la sous-section D de la présente section et permettent d’en saisir le contenu, aucune recherche dans les dossiers papier n’est nécessaire. Si ces bases de données ne contiennent pas tous ces renseignements, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est également tenue d’examiner, pour les comptes de valeur élevée, le dossier principal actuel du client et, dans la mesure où ils ne figurent pas dans ce dossier, les documents ci-après associés au compte et obtenus par l’institution financière canadienne déclarante au cours des cinq années précédentes, quant à la présence des indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section :






If the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution’s electronically searchable databases include fields for, and capture all of the information described in, subparagraph D(3) of this section, then no further paper record search is required. If the electronic databases do not capture all of this information, then with respect to a High Value Account, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must also review the current customer master file and, to the extent not contained in the current customer master file, the following documents associated with the account and obtained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution within the last five years for any of the U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of this section:





a) les preuves documentaires les plus récentes recueillies à l’égard du compte;






a) The most recent documentary evidence collected with respect to the account;





b) la convention ou le document d’ouverture de compte le plus récent;






b) The most recent account opening contract or documentation;





c) la documentation la plus récente obtenue par l’institution financière canadienne déclarante dans le cadre des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC) ou à d’autres fins réglementaires;






c) The most recent documentation obtained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures or for other regulatory purposes;





d) toute procuration ou délégation de signature en cours de validité;






d) Any power of attorney or signature authority forms currently in effect; and





e) tout ordre de virement permanent en cours de validité.






e) Any standing instructions to transfer funds currently in effect.





3. Exception lorsque les bases de données contiennent suffisamment de renseignements






3. Exception Where Databases Contain Sufficient Information





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante n’est pas tenue d’examiner les dossiers papier conformément au paragraphe 2 de la sous-section D de la présente section si ses données pouvant faire l’objet de recherches par voie électronique contiennent les éléments suivants :






A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is not required to perform the paper record search described in subparagraph D(2) of this section if the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution’s electronically searchable information includes the following:





a) la nationalité ou le pays de résidence du titulaire du compte;






a) The Account Holder’s nationality or residence status;





b) l’adresse postale et l’adresse de domicile du titulaire du compte figurant au dossier de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante;






b) The Account Holder’s residence address and mailing address currently on file with the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution;





c) le ou les numéros de téléphone du titulaire du compte figurant éventuellement au dossier de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante;






c) The Account Holder’s telephone number(s) currently on file, if any, with the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution;





d) un éventuel ordre de virement permanent depuis le compte vers un autre compte (y compris un compte auprès d’une autre succursale de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante ou d’une autre institution financière);






d) Whether there are standing instructions to transfer funds in the account to another account (including an account at another branch of the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution or another Financial Institution);





e) une éventuelle adresse actuelle portant la mention « à l’attention de » ou « envoi à garder en instance » pour le titulaire du compte; et






e) Whether there is a current “in-care-of” address or “hold mail” address for the Account Holder; and





f) une éventuelle procuration ou délégation de signature sur le compte.






f) Whether there is any power of attorney or signatory authority for the account.





4. Vérification auprès du chargé de clientèle en vue d’une connaissance réelle du compte






4. Relationship Manager Inquiry for Actual Knowledge





Outre l’examen des données électroniques et des dossiers papier visé ci-dessus, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer comme un compte déclarable américain tout compte de valeur élevée confié à un chargé de clientèle (y compris les comptes financiers qui sont groupés avec ce compte de valeur élevée) si ce dernier sait de façon sûre que le titulaire du compte est une personne désignée des États-Unis.






In addition to the electronic and paper record searches described above, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat as a U.S. Reportable Account any High Value Account assigned to a relationship manager (including any Financial Accounts aggregated with such High Value Account) if the relationship manager has actual knowledge that the Account Holder is a Specified U.S. Person.





5. Conséquences de la découverte d’indices américains






5. Effect of Finding U.S. Indicia





a) Si l’examen approfondi des comptes de valeur élevée visé ci-dessus ne révèle la présence d’aucun des indices américains énumérés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section et que le compte n’est pas identifié comme étant détenu par une personne désignée des États-Unis selon le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section D de la présente section, aucune nouvelle démarche n’est requise jusqu’à ce que se produise un changement de circonstances ayant pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains soient associés au compte.






a) If none of the U.S. indicia listed in subparagraph B(1) of this section are discovered in the enhanced review of High Value Accounts described above, and the account is not identified as held by a Specified U.S. Person in subparagraph D(4) of this section, then no further action is required until there is a change in circumstances that results in one or more U.S. indicia being associated with the account.





b) Si l’examen approfondi des comptes de valeur élevée visé ci-dessus révèle la présence de l’un quelconque des indices américains énumérés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section ou si un changement ultérieur de circonstances a pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains sont associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, sauf si elle choisit d’appliquer le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section et que l’une des exceptions prévues à ce paragraphe s’applique relativement au compte.






b) If any of the U.S. indicia listed in subparagraph B(1) of this section are discovered in the enhanced review of High Value Accounts described above, or if there is a subsequent change in circumstances that results in one or more U.S. indicia being associated with the account, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless it elects to apply subparagraph B(4) of this section and one of the exceptions in such subparagraph applies with respect to that account.





c) À l’exception des comptes de dépôt visés au paragraphe 4 de la sous-section A de la présente section, tout compte de particulier préexistant qui a été identifié comme compte déclarable américain en application de la présente section est considéré comme compte déclarable américain durant toutes les années subséquentes, sauf si le titulaire du compte cesse d’être une personne désignée des États-Unis.






c) Except for Depository Accounts described in subparagraph A(4) of this section, any Preexisting Individual Account that has been identified as a U.S. Reportable Account under this section shall be treated as a U.S. Reportable Account in all subsequent years, unless the Account Holder ceases to be a Specified U.S. Person.





E. Procédures supplémentaires applicables aux comptes de valeur élevée






E. Additional Procedures Applicable to High Value Accounts





1. Si un compte de particulier préexistant est un compte de valeur élevée au 30 juin 2014, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue d’y appliquer les procédures d’examen approfondi visées à la sous-section D de la présente section le 30 juin 2015 au plus tard. Si, d’après cet examen, ce compte est identifié comme compte déclarable américain au 31 décembre 2014 ou avant cette date, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de fournir les renseignements requis pour 2014 dans la première déclaration concernant le compte et sur une base annuelle par la suite. Dans le cas d’un compte identifié comme compte déclarable américain après le 31 décembre 2014 et au plus tard le 30 juin 2015, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante n’est pas tenue de fournir les renseignements requis pour 2014 dans la première déclaration concernant le compte. Elle doit toutefois les fournir sur une base annuelle par la suite.






1. If a Preexisting Individual Account is a High Value Account as of June 30, 2014, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must complete the enhanced review procedures described in paragraph D of this section with respect to such account by June 30, 2015. If based on this review such account is identified as a U.S. Reportable Account on or before December 31, 2014, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must report the required information about such account with respect to 2014 in the first report on the account and on an annual basis thereafter. In the case of an account identified as a U.S. Reportable Account after December 31, 2014, and on or before June 30, 2015, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is not required to report information about such account with respect to 2014, but must report information about the account on an annual basis thereafter.





2. Si un compte de particulier préexistant n’est pas un compte de valeur élevée au 30 juin 2014 mais est un tel compte au dernier jour de 2015 ou d’une année civile subséquente, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue d’y appliquer les procédures d’examen approfondi visées à la sous-section D de la présente section dans les six mois qui suivent la fin de l’année civile dans laquelle le compte devient un compte de valeur élevée. Si, d’après cet examen, ce compte est identifié comme compte déclarable américain, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de fournir les renseignements requis concernant ce compte pour l’année où il est identifié comme compte déclarable américain et pour les années subséquentes sur une base annuelle, sauf si le titulaire du compte cesse d’être une personne désignée des États-Unis.






2. If a Preexisting Individual Account is not a High Value Account as of June 30, 2014, but becomes a High Value Account as of the last day of 2015 or any subsequent calendar year, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must complete the enhanced review procedures described in paragraph D of this section with respect to such account within six months after the last day of the calendar year in which the account becomes a High Value Account. If based on this review such account is identified as a U.S. Reportable Account, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must report the required information about such account with respect to the year in which it is identified as a U.S. Reportable Account and subsequent years on an annual basis, unless the Account Holder ceases to be a Specified U.S. Person.





3. Une fois qu’elle a appliqué à un compte de valeur élevée les procédures d’examen approfondi visées à la sous-section D de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante n’est pas tenue de les réappliquer au même compte au cours des années subséquentes, exception faite de la vérification auprès du chargé de clientèle prévue au paragraphe 4 de la sous-section D de la présente section.






3. Once a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution applies the enhanced review procedures described in paragraph D of this section to a High Value Account, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is not required to re-apply such procedures, other than the relationship manager inquiry described in subparagraph D(4) of this section, to the same High Value Account in any subsequent year.





4. Si un changement de circonstances concernant un compte de valeur élevée a pour conséquence qu’un ou plusieurs indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section sont associés au compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, sauf si elle choisit d’appliquer le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section et que l’une des exceptions prévues à ce paragraphe s’applique relativement au compte.






4. If there is a change of circumstances with respect to a High Value Account that results in one or more U.S. indicia described in subparagraph B(1) of this section being associated with the account, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless it elects to apply subparagraph B(4) of this section and one of the exceptions in such subparagraph applies with respect to that account.





5. L’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de mettre en oeuvre des procédures pour garantir que le chargé de clientèle détecte tout changement de circonstances concernant un compte. Par exemple, si un chargé de clientèle est avisé que le titulaire du compte dispose d’une nouvelle adresse postale aux États-Unis, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer cette nouvelle adresse comme un changement de circonstances et, si elle choisit d’appliquer le paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la présente section, d’obtenir les documents appropriés auprès du titulaire du compte.






5. A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must implement procedures to ensure that a relationship manager identifies any change in circumstances of an account. For example, if a relationship manager is notified that the Account Holder has a new mailing address in the United States, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is required to treat the new address as a change in circumstances and, if it elects to apply subparagraph B(4) of this section, is required to obtain the appropriate documentation from the Account Holder.





F. Comptes de particuliers préexistants documentés à d’autres fins






F. Preexisting Individual Accounts That Have Been Documented for Certain Other Purposes





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante qui, dans le but de remplir ses obligations en vertu d’un accord d’intermédiaire agréé, de société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue ou de fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue conclu avec l’IRS ou en vertu du chapitre 61 du Titre 26 du United States Code, a déjà obtenu auprès d’un titulaire de compte la documentation permettant d’établir que celui-ci n’est ni citoyen ni résident des États-Unis n’est pas tenue d’appliquer les procédures visées au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la présente section relativement aux comptes de faible valeur ou aux paragraphes 1 à 3 de la sous-section D de la présente section relativement aux comptes de valeur élevée.






A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution that has previously obtained documentation from an Account Holder to establish the Account Holder’s status as neither a U.S. citizen nor a U.S. resident in order to meet its obligations under a qualified intermediary, withholding foreign partnership, or withholding foreign trust agreement with the IRS, or to fulfill its obligations under chapter 61 of Title 26 of the United States Code, is not required to perform the procedures described in subparagraph B(1) of this section with respect to Lower Value Accounts or subparagraphs D(1) through D(3) of this section with respect to High Value Accounts.





III. Nouveaux comptes de particuliers






III. New Individual Accounts





Les règles et procédures ci-après s’appliquent à l’identification des comptes déclarables américains parmi les comptes financiers détenus par des personnes physiques et ouverts le 1er juillet 2014 ou par la suite (« nouveaux comptes de particuliers »).






The following rules and procedures apply for purposes of identifying U.S. Reportable Accounts among Financial Accounts held by individuals and opened on or after July 1, 2014 (“New Individual Accounts”).





A. Comptes non assujettis à examen, à identification ou à déclaration






A. Accounts Not Required to Be Reviewed, Identified, or Reported





Sauf si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en fait le choix contraire, soit à l’égard de l’ensemble des nouveaux comptes de particuliers, soit séparément à l’égard d’un groupe de ces comptes clairement identifié – à supposer que les règles de mise en œuvre du Canada lui en offrent la possibilité –, les nouveaux comptes de particuliers ci-après n’ont pas à faire l’objet d’un examen, d’une identification ou d’une déclaration à titre de comptes déclarables américains :






Unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution elects otherwise, either with respect to all New Individual Accounts or, separately, with respect to any clearly identified group of such accounts, where the implementing rules in Canada provide for such an election, the following New Individual Accounts are not required to be reviewed, identified, or reported as U.S. Reportable Accounts:





1. Un compte de dépôt, à moins qu’il ne présente un solde excédant 50 000 $ à la fin d’une année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate.






1. A Depository Account unless the account balance exceeds $50,000 at the end of any calendar year or other appropriate reporting period.





2. Un contrat d’assurance, à moins qu’il ne présente une valeur de rachat excédant 50 000 $ à la fin d’une année civile ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate.






2. A Cash Value Insurance Contract unless the Cash Value exceeds $50,000 at the end of any calendar year or other appropriate reporting period.





B. Autres nouveaux comptes de particuliers






B. Other New Individual Accounts





1. S’agissant de nouveaux comptes de particuliers qui ne sont pas visés à la sous-section A de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit obtenir, lors de l’ouverture du compte (ou dans les 90 jours suivant la fin de l’année civile dans laquelle le compte cesse d’être visé à cette sous-section), une autocertification – pouvant faire partie des documents d’ouverture du compte – qui lui permet de déterminer si le titulaire du compte réside aux États-Unis à des fins fiscales (à cette fin, un citoyen américain est considéré comme un résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales même si le titulaire du compte est également un résident fiscal d’un autre territoire) et confirmer la plausibilité de l’autocertification en s’appuyant sur les renseignements qu’elle a obtenus dans le cadre de l’ouverture du compte, y compris les documents recueillis en application des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC).






(1) With respect to New Individual Accounts not described in paragraph A of this section, upon account opening (or within 90 days after the end of the calendar year in which the account ceases to be described in paragraph A of this section), the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must obtain a self-certification, which may be part of the account opening documentation, that allows the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution to determine whether the Account Holder is resident in the United States for tax purposes (for this purpose, a U.S. citizen is considered to be resident in the United States for tax purposes, even if the Account Holder is also a tax resident of another jurisdiction) and confirm the reasonableness of such self-certification based on the information obtained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution in connection with the opening of the account, including any documentation collected pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures.





2. Si l’autocertification établit que le titulaire du compte réside aux États-Unis à des fins fiscales, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain et obtenir une autocertification sur laquelle figure le NIF américain du titulaire du compte (établie sur le formulaire W-9 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu).






(2) If the self-certification establishes that the Account Holder is resident in the United States for tax purposes, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account and obtain a self-certification that includes the Account Holder’s U.S. TIN (which may be an IRS Form W-9 or other similar agreed form).





3. Si, par suite d’un changement de circonstances concernant un nouveau compte de particulier, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante sait ou a des raisons de savoir que l’autocertification originale est inexacte ou non fiable, elle ne peut se fier à cette autocertification et doit obtenir une autocertification valide qui établit si le titulaire du compte est citoyen ou résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales. Si elle ne peut obtenir d’autocertification valide, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain.






(3) If there is a change of circumstances with respect to a New Individual Account that causes the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution to know, or have reason to know, that the original self-certification is incorrect or unreliable, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution cannot rely on the original self-certification and must obtain a valid self-certification that establishes whether the Account Holder is a U.S. citizen or resident for U.S. tax purposes. If the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is unable to obtain a valid self-certification, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account.





IV. Comptes d’entités préexistants






IV. Preexisting Entity Accounts





Les règles et procédures ci-après s’appliquent à l’identification des comptes déclarables américains et des comptes détenus par des institutions financières non participantes parmi les comptes préexistants détenus par des entités (« comptes d’entités préexistants »).






The following rules and procedures apply for purposes of identifying U.S. Reportable Accounts and accounts held by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions among Preexisting Accounts held by Entities (“Preexisting Entity Accounts”).





A. Comptes d’entités non assujettis à examen, à identification ou à déclaration






A. Entity Accounts Not Required to Be Reviewed, Identified or Reported





Sauf si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en fait le choix contraire, soit à l’égard de l’ensemble des comptes d’entités préexistants, soit séparément à l’égard d’un groupe de ces comptes clairement identifié – à supposer que les règles de mise en oeuvre du Canada lui en offrent la possibilité –, les comptes d’entités préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 n’excède pas 250 000 $ n’ont pas à faire l’objet d’un examen, d’une identification ou d’une déclaration à titre de comptes déclarables américains tant que leur solde ou valeur n’excède pas 1 000 000 $.






Unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution elects otherwise, either with respect to all Preexisting Entity Accounts or, separately, with respect to any clearly identified group of such accounts, where the implementing rules in Canada provide for such an election, a Preexisting Entity Account with an account balance or value that does not exceed $250,000 as of June 30, 2014, is not required to be reviewed, identified, or reported as a U.S. Reportable Account until the account balance or value exceeds $1,000,000.





B. Comptes d’entités assujettis à examen .






B. Entity Accounts Subject to Review





Les comptes d’entités préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 excède 250 000 $ et les comptes d’entités préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur n’excède pas 250 000 $ au 30 juin 2014 mais excède 1 000 000 $ au dernier jour de 2015 ou de toute année civile ultérieure, doivent être examinés conformément aux procédures énoncées à la sous-section D de la présente section






A Preexisting Entity Account that has an account balance or value that exceeds $250,000 as of June 30, 2014, and a Preexisting Entity Account that does not exceed $250,000 as of June 30, 2014, but the account balance or value of which exceeds $1,000,000 as of the last day of 2015 or any subsequent calendar year, must be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph D of this section.





C. Comptes d’entités assujettis à déclaration






C. Entity Accounts with Respect to Which Reporting Is Required





S’agissant de comptes d’entités préexistants visés à la sous-section B de la présente section, seuls les comptes détenus par une ou plusieurs entités qui sont des personnes désignées des États-Unis ou par des EENF passives dont une ou plusieurs personnes détenant le contrôle sont des citoyens ou des résidents des États-Unis sont considérés comme des comptes déclarables américains. De plus, les comptes détenus par des institutions financières non participantes sont considérés comme des comptes pour lesquels les paiements totaux visés à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord sont déclarés à l’autorité compétente du Canada.






With respect to Preexisting Entity Accounts described in paragraph B of this section, only accounts that are held by one or more Entities that are Specified U.S. Persons, or by Passive NFFEs with one or more Controlling Persons who are U.S. citizens or residents, shall be treated as U.S. Reportable Accounts. In addition, accounts held by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions shall be treated as accounts for which aggregate payments as described in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement are reported to the Canadian Competent Authority.





D. Procédures de vérification relatives à l’identification des comptes d’entités assujettis à déclaration






D. Review Procedures for Identifying Entity Accounts with Respect to Which Reporting Is Required





Pour les comptes d’entités préexistants visés à la sous-section B de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de procéder aux vérifications ci-après afin de déterminer si le compte est détenu par une ou plusieurs personnes désignées des États-Unis, par des EENF passives dont une ou plusieurs personnes détenant le contrôle sont des citoyens ou des résidents des États-Unis ou par une institution financière non participante :






For Preexisting Entity Accounts described in paragraph B of this section, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must apply the following review procedures to determine whether the account is held by one or more Specified U.S. Persons, by Passive NFFEs with one or more Controlling Persons who are U.S. citizens or residents, or by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions:





1. Déterminer si l’entité est une personne désignée des États-Unis






1. Determine Whether the Entity Is a Specified U.S. Person





a) Sont à examiner les renseignements obtenus à des fins réglementaires ou de relations avec le client (y compris les renseignements recueillis dans le cadre des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC)) afin de déterminer s’ils indiquent que le titulaire du compte est une personne des États-Unis. À cette fin, un lieu de constitution ou une adresse aux États-Unis font partie des renseignements qui indiquent que le titulaire du compte est une personne des États-Unis.






a) Review information maintained for regulatory or custom-er relationship purposes (including information collected pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures) to determine whether the information indicates that the Account Holder is a U.S. Person. For this purpose, information indicating that the Account Holder is a U.S. Person includes a U.S. place of incorporation or organization, or a U.S. address.





b) Si les renseignements obtenus indiquent que le titulaire du compte est une personne des États-Unis, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain, à moins qu’elle n’obtienne une autocertification du titulaire du compte (établie sur le formulaire W-8 ou W-9 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu) ou ne détermine avec une certitude suffisante, sur la base de renseignements en sa possession ou accessibles au public, que le titulaire du compte n’est pas une personne désignée des États-Unis.






b) If the information indicates that the Account Holder is a U.S. Person, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account unless it obtains a self-certification from the Account Holder (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or W-9, or a similar agreed form), or reasonably determines based on information in its possession or that is publicly available, that the Account Holder is not a Specified U.S. Person.





2. Déterminer si une entité non américaine est une institution financière






2. Determine Whether a Non-U.S. Entity Is a Financial Institution





a) Sont à examiner les renseignements obtenus à des fins réglementaires ou de relations avec le client (y compris les renseignements recueillis dans le cadre des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC)) afin de déterminer s’ils indiquent que le titulaire du compte est une institution financière.






a) Review information maintained for regulatory or custom-er relationship purposes (including information collected pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures) to determine whether the information indicates that the Account Holder is a Financial Institution.





b) Si les renseignements obtenus indiquent que le titulaire du compte est une institution financière ou si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante constate que le numéro d’identification d’intermédiaire mondial (Global Intermediary Identification Number) du titulaire du compte figure sur la liste des IFE publiée par l’IRS, le compte n’est pas un compte déclarable américain.






b) If the information indicates that the Account Holder is a Financial Institution, or the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution verifies the Account Holder’s Global Intermediary Identification Number on the published IRS FFI list, then the account is not a U.S. Reportable Account.





3. Déterminer si une institution financière est une institution financière non participante pour laquelle les paiements perçus sont assujettis à la procédure de déclaration des paiements totaux prévue à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord






3. Determine Whether a Financial Institution Is a Nonparticipating Financial Institution Payments to Which Are Subject to Aggregate Reporting under Subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement





a) Sous réserve de l’alinéa 3b) de la sous-section D de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante peut établir que le titulaire du compte est une institution financière canadienne ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada si elle détermine avec une certitude suffisante, sur la base du numéro d’identification d’intermédiaire mondial du titulaire du compte qui figure sur la liste des IFE publiée par l’IRS ou d’autres renseignements en sa possession ou accessibles au public, que tel est le statut du titulaire du compte, s’il y a lieu. Le cas échéant, aucun examen, identification ou déclaration supplémentaire n’est requis pour ce compte.






a) Subject to subparagraph D(3)(b) of this section, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may determine that the Account Holder is a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution if the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution reasonably determines that the Account Holder has such status on the basis of the Account Holder’s Global Intermediary Identification Number on the published IRS FFI list or other information that is publicly available or in the possession of the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, as applicable. In such case, no further review, identification, or reporting is required with respect to the account.





b) Si le titulaire du compte est une institution financière canadienne, ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada, qui est considérée par l’IRS comme une institution financière non participante, le compte n’est pas un compte déclarable américain. Toutefois, les paiements effectués au titulaire du compte doivent être déclarés conformément à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord.






b) If the Account Holder is a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution treated by the IRS as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution, then the account is not a U.S. Reportable Account, but payments to the Account Holder must be reported as contemplated in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement.





c) Si le titulaire du compte n’est pas une institution financière canadienne ni une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de considérer le titulaire du compte comme une institution financière non participante pour laquelle les paiements perçus doivent être déclarés conformément à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord, sauf si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante, selon le cas :






c) If the Account Holder is not a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution, then the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the Account Holder as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution payments to which are reportable under subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement, unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution:





(1) obtient une autocertification (établie sur le formulaire W-8 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu) auprès du titulaire du compte indiquant qu’il est une IFE réputée conforme certifiée (certified deemed-compliant FFI) ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner), au sens des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






(1) Obtains a self-certification (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or similar agreed form) from the Account Holder that it is a certified deemed-compliant FFI, or an exempt beneficial owner, as those terms are defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations; or





(2) dans le cas d’une IFE participante ou d’une IFE réputée conforme enregistrée (registered deemed-compliant FFI), constate que le numéro d’identification d’intermédiaire mondial du titulaire du compte figure sur la liste des IFE publiée par l’IRS.






(2) In the case of a participating FFI or registered deemed-compliant FFI, verifies the Account Holder’s Global Intermediary Identification Number on the published IRS FFI list.





4. Déterminer si un compte détenu par une EENF est un compte déclarable américain






4. Determine Whether an Account Held by an NFFE Is a U.S. Reportable Account





S’agissant du titulaire d’un compte d’entité préexistant qui n’est identifié ni comme une personne des États-Unis ni comme une institution financière, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de déterminer (i) si le titulaire du compte a des personnes détenant le contrôle, (ii) s’il est une EENF passive et (iii) si l’une des personnes détenant le contrôle du titulaire du compte est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis. À cette fin, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit suivre les directives figurant aux alinéas 4a) à d) de la sous-section D de la présente section dans l’ordre qui convient le mieux à la situation.






With respect to an Account Holder of a Preexisting Entity Account that is not identified as either a U.S. Person or a Financial Institution, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must identify (i) whether the Account Holder has Controlling Persons, (ii) whether the Account Holder is a Passive NFFE, and (iii) whether any of the Controlling Persons of the Account Holder is a U.S. citizen or resident. In making these determinations the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must follow the guidance in subparagraphs D(4)(a) through D(4)(d) of this section in the order most appropriate under the circumstances.





a) Pour identifier les personnes détenant le contrôle du titulaire du compte, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante peut se servir des renseignements recueillis et tenus dans le cadre des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC).






a) For purposes of determining the Controlling Persons of an Account Holder, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may rely on information collected and maintained pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures.





b) Pour déterminer si le titulaire du compte est une EENF passive, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit obtenir une autocertification (établie sur le formulaire W-8 ou W-9 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu) auprès du titulaire du compte afin d’établir son statut, sauf si elle détermine avec une certitude suffisante, sur la base de renseignements en sa possession ou accessibles au public, que le titulaire du compte est une EENF active.






b) For purposes of determining whether the Account Holder is a Passive NFFE, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must obtain a self-certification (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or W-9, or on a similar agreed form) from the Account Holder to establish its status, unless it has information in its possession or that is publicly available, based on which it can reasonably determine that the Account Holder is an Active NFFE.





c) Pour déterminer si une personne détenant le contrôle d’une EENF passive est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis à des fins fiscales, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante peut se servir :






c) For purposes of determining whether a Controlling Person of a Passive NFFE is a U.S. citizen or resident for tax purposes, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may rely on:





(1) soit des renseignements recueillis et tenus dans le cadre des mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC) dans le cas d’un compte d’entité préexistant qui est détenu par une ou plusieurs EENF et dont le solde ou la valeur n’excède pas 1 000 000 $;






(1) Information collected and maintained pursuant to AML/KYC Procedures in the case of a Preexisting Entity Account held by one or more NFFEs with an account balance or value that does not exceed $1,000,000; or





(2) soit d’une autocertification (établie sur le formulaire W-8 ou W-9 de l’IRS ou sur un formulaire similaire convenu) auprès du titulaire du compte ou d’une personne détenant le contrôle dans le cas d’un compte d’entité préexistant qui est détenu par une ou plusieurs EENF et dont le solde ou la valeur excède 1 000 000 $.






(2) A self-certification (which may be on an IRS Form W-8 or W-9, or on a similar agreed form) from the Account Holder or such Controlling Person in the case of a Preexisting Entity Account held by one or more NFFEs with an account balance or value that exceeds $1,000,000.





d) Si l’une des personnes détenant le contrôle d’une EENF passive est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis, le compte est considéré comme un compte déclarable américain.






d) If any Controlling Person of a Passive NFFE is a U.S. citizen or resident, the account shall be treated as a U.S. Reportable Account.





E. Calendrier d’examen et procédures supplémentaires applicables aux comptes d’entités préexistants






E. Timing of Review and Additional Procedures Applicable to Preexisting Entity Accounts





1. L’examen des comptes d’entités préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 excède 250 000 $ doit être achevé le 30 juin 2016 au plus tard.






1. Review of Preexisting Entity Accounts with an account balance or value that exceeds $250,000 as of June 30, 2014 must be completed by June 30, 2016.





2. L’examen des comptes d’entités préexistants dont le solde ou la valeur au 30 juin 2014 n’excède pas 250 000 $, mais excède 1 000 000 $ au 31 décembre 2015 ou d’une année ultérieure doit être achevé dans les six mois qui suivent la fin de l’année civile au cours de laquelle le solde ou la valeur du compte excède 1 000 000 $.






2. Review of Preexisting Entity Accounts with an account balance or value that does not exceed $250,000 as of June 30, 2014, but exceeds $1,000,000 as of December 31 of 2015 or any subsequent year, must be completed within six months after the last day of the calendar year in which the account balance or value exceeds $1,000,000.





3. Si, par suite d’un changement de circonstances concernant un compte d’entité préexistant, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante sait ou a des raisons de savoir que l’autocertification ou un autre document associé au compte est inexact ou non fiable, elle doit déterminer à nouveau le statut du compte conformément aux procédures énoncées à la sous-section D de la présente section.






3. If there is a change of circumstances with respect to a Preexisting Entity Account that causes the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution to know, or have reason to know, that the self-certification or other documentation associated with an account is incorrect or unreliable, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must redetermine the status of the account in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph D of this section.





V. Nouveaux comptes d’entités






V. New Entity Accounts





Les règles et procédures ci-après s’appliquent à l’identification des comptes déclarables américains et des comptes détenus par des institutions financières non participantes parmi les comptes financiers détenus par des entités et ouverts le 1er juillet 2014 ou par la suite (« nouveaux comptes d’entités »).






The following rules and procedures apply for purposes of identifying U.S. Reportable Accounts and accounts held by Nonparticipating Financial Institutions among Financial Accounts held by Entities and opened on or after July 1, 2014 (“New Entity Accounts”).





A. Comptes d’entités non assujettis à examen, à identification ou à déclaration






A. Entity Accounts Not Required to Be Reviewed, Identified or Reported





Sauf si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante en fait le choix contraire, soit à l’égard de l’ensemble des nouveaux comptes d’entités, soit séparément à l’égard d’un groupe de ces comptes clairement identifié – à supposer que les règles de mise en œuvre du Canada lui en offrent la possibilité –, un compte de carte de crédit ou compte de crédit renouvelable qui est considéré comme un nouveau compte d’entité n’a pas à faire l’objet d’un examen, d’une identification ou d’une déclaration, pourvu que l’institution financière canadienne déclarante qui tient le compte mette en œuvre des politiques et des procédures visant à empêcher que le solde du compte dû au titulaire du compte excède 50 000 $.






Unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution elects otherwise, either with respect to all New Entity Accounts or, separately, with respect to any clearly identified group of such accounts, where the implementing rules in Canada provide for such election, a credit card account or a revolving credit facility treated as a New Entity Account is not required to be reviewed, identified, or reported, provided that the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution maintaining such account implements policies and procedures to prevent an account balance owed to the Account Holder that exceeds $50,000.





B. Autres nouveaux comptes d’entités






B. Other New Entity Accounts





S’agissant de nouveaux comptes d’entités non visés à la sous-section A de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de déterminer si le titulaire du compte est, selon le cas :






With respect to New Entity Accounts not described in paragraph A of this section, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must determine whether the Account Holder is:





1. une personne désignée des États-Unis;






(1) a Specified U.S. Person;





2. une institution financière canadienne ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada;






(2) a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution;





3. une IFE participante (participating FFI), une IFE réputée conforme (deemed-compliant FFI) ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner), au sens des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






(3) a participating FFI, a deemed-compliant FFI, or an exempt beneficial owner, as those terms are defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations; or





4. une EENF active ou une EENF passive.






(4) an Active NFFE or Passive NFFE.





C. Sous réserve de la sous-section D de la présente section, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante peut établir que le titulaire d’un compte est une EENF active, une institution financière canadienne ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada si elle détermine avec une certitude suffisante, sur la base du numéro d’identification d’intermédiaire mondial du titulaire du compte ou d’autres renseignements en sa possession ou accessibles au public, que tel est le statut du titulaire du compte.






C. Subject to paragraph D of this section, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may determine that the Account Holder is an Active NFFE, a Canadian Financial Institution, or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution if the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution reasonably determines that the Account Holder has such status on the basis of the Account Holder’s Global Intermediary Identification Number or other information that is publicly available or in the possession of the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, as applicable.





D. Si le titulaire du compte est une institution financière canadienne, ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada, qui est considérée par l’IRS comme une institution financière non participante, le compte n’est pas un compte déclarable américain. Toutefois, les paiements effectués au titulaire du compte doivent être déclarés conformément à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord.






D. If the Account Holder is a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution treated by the IRS as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution, then the account is not a U.S. Reportable Account, but payments to the Account Holder must be reported as contemplated in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement.





E. Dans les autres cas, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit obtenir une autocertification auprès du titulaire du compte afin d’établir le statut de celui-ci. Les règles ci-après s’appliquent sur la base de l’autocertification :






E. In all other cases, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must obtain a self-certification from the Account Holder to establish the Account Holder’s status. Based on the self-certification, the following rules apply:





1. Si le titulaire du compte est une personne désignée des États-Unis, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain.






1. If the Account Holder is a Specified U.S. Person, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account.





2. Si le titulaire du compte est une EENF passive, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit identifier les personnes détenant le contrôle conformément aux mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC) et déterminer, sur la base de l’autocertification fournie par le titulaire du compte ou par l’une de ces personnes, si l’une de ces personnes est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis. Dans l’affirmative, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit considérer le compte comme un compte déclarable américain.






2. If the Account Holder is a Passive NFFE, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must identify the Controlling Persons as determined under AML/KYC Procedures, and must determine whether any such person is a U.S. citizen or resident on the basis of a self-certification from the Account Holder or such person. If any such person is a U.S. citizen or resident, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must treat the account as a U.S. Reportable Account.





3. Si le titulaire du compte est visé à l’un des alinéas ci-après, le compte n’est pas un compte déclarable américain et aucune déclaration n’est requise à son égard :






3. If the Account Holder is:





a) une personne des États-Unis qui n’est pas une personne désignée des États-Unis;






a) a U.S. Person that is not a Specified U.S. Person;





b) sous réserve du paragraphe 4 de la sous-section E de la présente section, une institution financière canadienne ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada;






b) subject to subparagraph E(4) of this section, a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution;





c) une IFE participante (participating FFI), une IFE réputée conforme (deemed-compliant FFI) ou un bénéficiaire effectif exempté (exempt beneficial owner), au sens des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






c) a participating FFI, a deemed-compliant FFI, or an exempt beneficial owner, as those terms are defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





d) une EENF active;






d) an Active NFFE; or





e) une EENF passive dont aucune des personnes détenant le contrôle n’est un citoyen ou un résident des États-Unis.






e) a Passive NFFE none of the Controlling Persons of which is a U.S. citizen or resident,





4. Si le titulaire du compte est une institution financière non participante (y compris une institution financière canadienne, ou une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire autre que le Canada, qui est considérée par l’IRS comme une institution financière non participante), le compte n’est pas un compte déclarable américain. Toutefois, les paiements effectués au titulaire du compte doivent être déclarés conformément à l’alinéa 1b) de l’article 4 de l’Accord.






then the account is not a U.S. Reportable Account and no reporting is required with respect to the account.





VI. Règles particulières et définitions






4. If the Account Holder is a Nonparticipating Financial Institution (including a Canadian Financial Institution or other Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution treated by the IRS as a Nonparticipating Financial Institution), then the account is not a U.S. Reportable Account, but payments to the Account Holder must be reported as contemplated in subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4 of the Agreement.





Les règles et définitions supplémentaires ci-après s’appliquent à la mise en œuvre des procédures de diligence raisonnable énoncées ci dessus :






VI. Special Rules and Definitions





A. Utilisation des autocertifications et des preuves documentaires






The following additional rules and definitions apply in implementing the due diligence procedures described above:





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante ne peut se fier à une autocertification ou à une preuve documentaire dont elle sait ou a des raisons de savoir qu’elle est inexacte ou non fiable.






A. Reliance on Self-Certifications and Documentary Evidence





B. Définitions






A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may not rely on a self-certification or documentary evidence if the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution knows or has reason to know that the self-certification or documentary evidence is incorrect or unreliable.





Les définitions qui suivent s’appliquent à la présente annexe I :






B. Definitions





1. Mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC)






The following definitions apply for purposes of this Annex I:





L’expression « mesures de connaissance de la clientèle et de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent (AML/KYC) » désigne les obligations de diligence raisonnable relatives au client appliquées par une institution financière canadienne déclarante en vertu des dispositions de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent ou de règles similaires du Canada auxquelles cette institution financière canadienne déclarante est assujettie.






1. AML/KYC Procedures





2. EENF






“AML/KYC Procedures” means the customer due diligence procedures of a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution pursuant to the anti-money laundering or similar requirements of Canada to which such Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is subject.





Le terme « EENF » (entité étrangère non financière) désigne toute entité non américaine qui n’est pas une IFE, au sens donné au terme « FFI » dans les Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, ou qui est une entité visée à l’alinéa 4j) de la sous-section B de la présente section. Il comprend toute entité non américaine qui réside au Canada ou dans une autre juridiction partenaire et qui n’est pas une institution financière.






2. NFFE





3. EENF passive






An “NFFE” means any Non-U.S. Entity that is not an FFI as defined in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations or is an Entity described in subparagraph B(4)(j) of this section, and also includes any Non-U.S. Entity that is resident in Canada or another Partner Jurisdiction and that is not a Financial Institution.





Le terme « EENF passive » désigne toute EENF qui n’est pas :






3. Passive NFFE





a) une EENF active;






A “Passive NFFE” means any NFFE that is not





b) une société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign partnership) ou une fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign trust) conformément aux dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis.






a) an Active NFFE; or





4. EENF active






b) a withholding foreign partnership or withholding foreign trust pursuant to relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations.





Le terme « EENF active » désigne toute EENF qui satisfait à un ou à plusieurs des critères suivants :






4. Active NFFE





a) moins de 50 p. 100 du revenu brut de l’EENF pour l’année civile précédente ou une autre période de déclaration adéquate constitue un revenu passif et moins de 50 p. 100 des actifs détenus par l’EENF au cours de l’année civile précédente ou d’une autre période de déclaration adéquate sont des actifs qui produisent un revenu passif ou qui sont détenus à cette fin;






An “Active NFFE” means any NFFE that meets any of the following criteria:





b) les actions de l’EENF font l’objet de transactions régulières sur un marché boursier réglementé ou l’EENF est une entité liée à une entité dont les actions font l’objet de transactions régulières sur un marché boursier réglementé;






a) Less than 50 percent of the NFFE’s gross income for the preceding calendar year or other appropriate reporting period is passive income and less than 50 percent of the assets held by the NFFE during the preceding calendar year or other appropriate reporting period are assets that produce or are held for the production of passive income;





c) l’EENF est constituée dans un territoire américain et tous les propriétaires du bénéficiaire des paiements résident effectivement dans ce territoire;






b) The stock of the NFFE is regularly traded on an established securities market or the NFFE is a Related Entity of an Entity the stock of which is regularly traded on an established securities market;





d) l’EENF est un gouvernement (autre que le gouvernement américain), une subdivision politique d’un tel gouvernement (étant entendu que le terme « subdivision politique » comprend un État, une province, un comté ou une municipalité) ou un organisme public remplissant des fonctions d’un tel gouvernement ou d’une telle subdivision; le gouvernement d’un territoire américain; une organisation internationale; une banque centrale d’émission non américaine; ou une entité détenue à cent pour cent par une ou plusieurs des constructions précitées;






c) The NFFE is organized in a U.S. Territory and all of the owners of the payee are bona fide residents of that U.S. Territory;





e) les activités de l’EENF consistent pour l’essentiel à détenir (en tout ou en partie) les actions en circulation d’une ou de plusieurs filiales se livrant à des transactions ou à des activités qui ne sont pas celles d’une institution financière, ou à fournir du financement et des services à de telles filiales; toutefois, une EENF ne peut prétendre à ce statut si elle fonctionne (ou se présente) comme un fonds d’investissement, tel un fonds de capital-investissement, un fonds de capital-risque, un fonds de rachat d’entreprise par effet de levier ou tout autre mécanisme de placement dont l’objet est d’acquérir ou de financer des sociétés puis d’y conserver une participation sous forme d’actifs financiers à des fins d’investissement;






d) The NFFE is a government (other than the U.S. government), a political subdivision of such government (which, for the avoidance of doubt, includes a state, province, county, or municipality), or a public body performing a function of such government or a political subdivision thereof, a government of a U.S. Territory, an international organization, a non-U.S. central bank of issue, or an Entity wholly owned by one or more of the foregoing;





f) l’EENF n’exerce pas encore d’activités et n’a pas d’historique d’exploitation mais investit des capitaux dans des actifs en vue d’exercer une activité autre que celle d’une institution financière, à condition qu’elle ne puisse bénéficier de cette exception au-delà de 24 mois après la date de sa constitution initiale;






e) Substantially all of the activities of the NFFE consist of holding (in whole or in part) the outstanding stock of, or providing financing and services to, one or more subsidiaries that engage in trades or businesses other than the business of a Financial Institution, except that an NFFE shall not qualify for this status if the NFFE functions (or holds itself out) as an investment fund, such as a private equity fund, venture capital fund, leveraged buyout fund or any investment vehicle whose purpose is to acquire or fund companies and then hold interests in those companies as capital assets for investment purposes;





g) l’EENF n’était pas une institution financière durant les cinq années précédentes et est en voie de liquider ses actifs ou de se restructurer afin de poursuivre ou de reprendre une activité qui n’est pas celle d’une institution financière;






f) The NFFE is not yet operating a business and has no prior operating history, but is investing capital into assets with the intent to operate a business other than that of a Financial Institution, provided that the NFFE shall not qualify for this exception after the date that is 24 months after the date of the initial organization of the NFFE;





h) l’EENF se livre principalement à des opérations de financement ou de couverture avec ou pour des entités liées qui ne sont pas des institutions financières et ne fournit pas de services de financement ou de couverture à des entités qui ne sont pas des entités liées, à condition que le groupe auquel appartiennent ces entités liées se livre principalement à une activité qui n’est pas celle d’une institution financière;






g) The NFFE was not a Financial Institution in the past five years, and is in the process of liquidating its assets or is reorganizing with the intent to continue or recommence operations in a business other than that of a Financial Institution;





i) l’EENF est une « EENF exclue » (excepted NFFE) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






h) The NFFE primarily engages in financing and hedging transactions with, or for, Related Entities that are not Financial Institutions, and does not provide financing or hedging services to any Entity that is not a Related Entity, provided that the group of any such Related Entities is primarily engaged in a business other than that of a Financial Institution;





j) l’EENF remplit toutes les conditions suivantes :






i) The NFFE is an “excepted NFFE” as described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations; or





(1) elle a été constituée et est exploitée dans son territoire de résidence exclusivement à des fins religieuses, caritatives, scientifiques, artistiques, culturelles, sportives ou éducatives; ou elle a été constituée et est exploitée dans son territoire de résidence et elle est une organisation professionnelle, une ligue d’affaires (business league), une chambre de commerce, un syndicat, un organisme agricole ou horticole, une ligue d’action civique ou un organisme ayant pour mission la promotion du bien-être collectif;






j) The NFFE meets all of the following requirements:





(2) elle est exonérée d’impôt sur le revenu dans son territoire de résidence;






(1) It is established and operated in its jurisdiction of residence exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, artistic, cultural, athletic, or educational purposes; or it is established and operated in its jurisdiction of residence and it is a professional organization, business league, chamber of commerce, labor organization, agricultural or horticultural organization, civic league or an organization operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare;





(3) elle n’a ni actionnaires ni membres qui ont des droits de propriété ou de bénéficiaire sur son revenu ou ses actifs;






(2) It is exempt from income tax in its jurisdiction of residence;





(4) le droit applicable dans son territoire de résidence ou ses documents constitutifs ne permettent pas que son revenu ou ses actifs soient distribués à une personne physique ou à une entité non caritative, ou utilisés à leur bénéfice, sauf dans le cadre des activités caritatives de l’EENF ou à titre de rémunération raisonnable pour services rendus ou de versement représentant la juste valeur marchande d’un bien que l’EENF a acheté;






(3) It has no shareholders or members who have a proprietary or beneficial interest in its income or assets;





(5) le droit applicable dans son territoire de résidence ou ses documents constitutifs prévoient que, lors de sa liquidation ou dissolution, tous ses actifs sont soit distribués à une entité gouvernementale ou à une autre organisation sans but lucratif, soit dévolus au gouvernement du territoire de résidence de l’EENF ou de l’une de ses subdivisions politiques.






(4) The applicable laws of the NFFE’s jurisdiction of residence or the NFFE’s formation documents do not permit any income or assets of the NFFE to be distributed to, or applied for the benefit of, a private person or non-charitable Entity other than pursuant to the conduct of the NFFE’s charitable activities, or as payment of reasonable compensation for services rendered, or as payment representing the fair market value of property which the NFFE has purchased; and





5. Compte préexistant






(5) The applicable laws of the NFFE’s jurisdiction of residence or the NFFE’s formation documents require that, upon the NFFE’s liquidation or dissolution, all of its assets be distributed to a governmental entity or other non-profit organization, or escheat to the government of the NFFE’s jurisdiction of residence or any political subdivision thereof.





Le terme « compte préexistant » désigne un compte financier détenu auprès d’une institution financière déclarante au 30 juin 2014.






5. Preexisting Account





C. Règles de totalisation des soldes de compte et de conversion des monnaies






A “Preexisting Account” means a Financial Account maintained by a Reporting Financial Institution as of June 30, 2014.





1. Totalisation des comptes de personnes physiques






C. Account Balance Aggregation and Currency Translation Rules





Pour déterminer le solde total ou la valeur totale des comptes financiers détenus par une personne physique, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de totaliser les comptes financiers tenus par elle ou par une entité liée, mais seulement dans la mesure où les systèmes informatiques de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante établissent un lien entre les comptes financiers au moyen d’un élément de données, comme le numéro de client ou le numéro d’identification fiscal, et permettent d’effectuer la totalisation des soldes ou des valeurs des comptes. Aux fins d’application des exigences en matière de totalisation énoncées au présent paragraphe 1, chaque titulaire d’un compte financier conjoint se voit attribuer la totalité du solde ou de la valeur du compte.






1. Aggregation of Individual Accounts





2. Totalisation des comptes d’entités






For purposes of determining the aggregate balance or value of Financial Accounts held by an individual, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is required to aggregate all Financial Accounts maintained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, or by a Related Entity, but only to the extent that the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution’s computerized systems link the Financial Accounts by reference to a data element such as client number or taxpayer identification number, and allow account balances or values to be aggregated. Each holder of a jointly held Financial Account shall be attributed the entire balance or value of the jointly held Financial Account for purposes of applying the aggregation requirements described in this paragraph 1.





Pour déterminer le solde total ou la valeur totale des comptes financiers détenus par une entité, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est tenue de prendre en compte tous les comptes financiers tenus par elle ou par une entité liée, mais seulement dans la mesure où les systèmes informatiques de l’institution financière canadienne déclarante établissent un lien entre ces comptes au moyen d’un élément de données, comme le numéro de client ou le numéro d’identification fiscal, et permettent d’effectuer la totalisation des soldes ou des valeurs des comptes.






2. Aggregation of Entity Accounts





3. Règle de totalisation spéciale applicable aux chargés de clientèle.






For purposes of determining the aggregate balance or value of Financial Accounts held by an Entity, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is required to take into account all Financial Accounts that are maintained by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution, or by a Related Entity, but only to the extent that the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution’s computerized systems link the Financial Accounts by reference to a data element such as client number or taxpayer identification number, and allow account balances or values to be aggregated.





Pour déterminer le solde total ou la valeur totale des comptes financiers détenus par une personne dans le but d’établir si un compte financier est un compte de valeur élevée, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante est également tenue de totaliser les comptes dont un chargé de clientèle sait ou a des raisons de savoir qu’ils sont, directement ou indirectement, détenus, contrôlés ou créés par la même personne (autrement qu’en sa qualité de fiduciaire).






3. Special Aggregation Rule Applicable to Relationship Managers





4. Règles de conversion des monnaies






For purposes of determining the aggregate balance or value of Financial Accounts held by a person to determine whether a Financial Account is a High Value Account, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is also required, in the case of any Financial Accounts that a relationship manager knows, or has reason to know, are directly or indirectly owned, controlled, or established (other than in a fiduciary capacity) by the same person, to aggregate all such accounts.





Pour déterminer le solde ou la valeur des comptes financiers libellés dans une monnaie autre que le dollar américain, l’institution financière canadienne déclarante doit convertir dans cette monnaie les seuils en dollars américains fixés dans la présente annexe I, sur la base du cours au comptant publié le dernier jour de l’année civile qui précède celle au cours de laquelle elle calcule le solde ou la valeur d’un compte.






4. Currency Translation Rule





D. Preuve documentaire






For purposes of determining the balance or value of Financial Accounts denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar, a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must convert the U.S. dollar threshold amounts described in this Annex I into such currency using a published spot rate determined as of the last day of the calendar year preceding the year in which the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution is determining the balance or value.





Pour l’application de la présente annexe I, les documents ci-après constituent des preuves documentaires acceptables :






D. Documentary Evidence





1. Une attestation de résidence délivrée par un organisme public autorisé (par exemple, le gouvernement, une agence de celui-ci ou une municipalité) du territoire duquel le bénéficiaire des paiements affirme être résident.






For purposes of this Annex I, acceptable documentary evidence includes any of the following:





2. Dans le cas d’une personne physique, toute pièce d’identité valide délivrée par un organisme public autorisé (par exemple, le gouvernement, une agence de celui-ci ou une municipalité), sur laquelle figure le nom de la personne et qui sert habituellement à l’identifier.






1. A certificate of residence issued by an authorized government body (for example, a government or agency thereof, or a municipality) of the jurisdiction in which the payee claims to be a resident.





3. Dans le cas d’une entité, tout document officiel délivré par un organisme public autorisé (par exemple, le gouvernement, une agence de celui-ci ou une municipalité) sur lequel figure la dénomination de l’entité et soit l’adresse de son établissement principal dans le territoire (ou le territoire américain) dont elle affirme être un résident, soit le territoire (ou le territoire américain) où elle a été constituée.






2. With respect to an individual, any valid identification issued by an authorized government body (for example, a government or agency thereof, or a municipality), that includes the individual’s name and is typically used for identification purposes.





4. Dans le cas d’un compte financier tenu dans un territoire assujetti à des règles de lutte contre le blanchiment d’argent qui ont été approuvées par l’IRS dans le cadre d’un accord avec un intermédiaire agréé (QI agreement), visé par les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, l’un des documents – autre que les formulaires W-8 ou W-9 – dont il est fait mention dans l’annexe de l’accord et qui sert à identifier des personnes physiques ou des entités.






3. With respect to an Entity, any official documentation issued by an authorized government body (for example, a government or agency thereof, or a municipality) that includes the name of the Entity and either the address of its principal office in the jurisdiction (or U.S. Territory) in which it claims to be a resident or the jurisdiction (or U.S. Territory) in which the Entity was incorporated or organized.





5. Tout état financier, tout rapport de solvabilité établi par un tiers, toute déclaration de cessation de paiement ou tout rapport de la Securities and Exchange Commission des États-Unis.






4. With respect to a Financial Account maintained in a jurisdiction with anti-money laundering rules that have been approved by the IRS in connection with a QI agreement (as described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations), any of the documents, other than a Form W-8 or W-9, referenced in the jurisdiction’s attachment to the QI agreement for identifying individuals or Entities.





E. Procédures de rechange applicables aux comptes financiers détenus par des personnes physiques bénéficiaires de contrats d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat






5. Any financial statement, third-party credit report, bankruptcy filing, or U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission report.





L’institution financière canadienne déclarante peut présumer que la personne physique (autre que le propriétaire) bénéficiaire d’un contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat qui reçoit une prestation de décès n’est pas une personne désignée des États-Unis et peut considérer ce compte financier comme un compte autre qu’un compte déclarable américain, sauf si elle sait ou a des raisons de savoir que le bénéficiaire est une personne désignée des États-Unis. L’institution financière canadienne déclarante a des raisons de savoir que le bénéficiaire d’un contrat d’assurance à forte valeur de rachat est une personne désignée des États-Unis si les renseignements recueillis par elle et associés au bénéficiaire comportent des indices américains visés au paragraphe 1 de la sous-section B de la section II de la présente annexe I. Si l’institution financière canadienne déclarante sait ou a des raisons de savoir que le bénéficiaire est une personne désignée des États-Unis, elle doit suivre les procédures prévues au paragraphe 3 de la sous-section B de la section II de la présente annexe I.






E. Alternative Procedures for Financial Accounts Held by Individual Beneficiaries of a Cash Value Insurance Contract





F. Procédures de tiers






A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution may presume that an individual beneficiary (other than the owner) of a Cash Value Insurance Contract receiving a death benefit is not a Specified U.S. Person and may treat such Financial Account as other than a U.S. Reportable Account unless the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution knows, or has reason to know, that the beneficiary is a Specified U.S. Person. A Reporting Canadian Financial Institution has reason to know that a beneficiary of a Cash Value Insurance Contract is a Specified U.S. Person if the information collected by the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution and associated with the beneficiary contains U.S. indicia as described in subparagraph (B)(1) of section II of this Annex I. If a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution knows, or has reason to know, that the beneficiary is a Specified U.S. Person, the Reporting Canadian Financial Institution must follow the procedures in subparagraph B(3) of section II of this Annex I.





Que le choix prévu à la sous-section C de la section I de la présente annexe I ait été fait ou non, le Canada peut autoriser les institutions financières canadiennes déclarantes à se fonder sur les procédures de diligence raisonnable appliquées par des tiers, dans la mesure prévue par les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis.






F. Reliance on Third Parties





ANNEXE II 






Regardless of whether an election is made under paragraph C of section I of this Annex I, Canada may permit Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions to rely on due diligence procedures performed by third parties, to the extent provided in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations.





INSTITUTIONS FINANCIÈRES CANADIENNES NON DÉCLARANTES ET PRODUITS DISPENSÉS DE DÉCLARATION






ANNEX II 





I. Généralités






NON-REPORTING CANADIAN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND PRODUCTS





A. La présente annexe peut être modifiée par entente mutuelle écrite entre les autorités compétentes du Canada et des États-Unis en vue :






I. General





1. de l’ajout d’autres entités, comptes et produits qui présentent un faible risque d’être utilisés par des personnes des États-Unis pour frauder le fisc américain et dont les caractéristiques sont similaires à celles des entités, comptes et produits énumérés dans la présente annexe à la date de la signature de l’Accord;






A. This Annex may be modified by a mutual written decision entered into between the Competent Authorities of Canada and the United States:





2. de la suppression d’entités, de comptes et de produits qui, par suite d’un changement de circonstances, ne présentent plus un faible risque d’être utilisés par des personnes des États-Unis pour frauder le fisc américain.






1. To include additional Entities, accounts, and products that present a low risk of being used by U.S. Persons to evade U.S. tax and that have similar characteristics to the Entities, accounts, and products identified in this Annex as of the date of signature of the Agreement; or





Tout ajout ou toute suppression de cet ordre entre en vigueur à la date de la signature de l’entente mutuelle, sauf disposition contraire prévue dans cette entente.






2. To remove Entities, accounts, and products that, due to changes in circumstances, no longer present a low risk of being used by U.S. Persons to evade U.S. tax.





B. Les procédures en vue d’en arriver à l’entente mutuelle mentionnée à la sous-section A de la présente section peuvent être incluses dans l’accord ou l’arrangement visé au paragraphe 6 de l’article 3 de l’Accord.






Any such addition or removal shall be effective on the date of signature of the mutual decision unless otherwise provided therein.





II. Bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés






B. Procedures for reaching a mutual decision described in paragraph A of this section may be included in the mutual agreement or arrangement described in paragraph 6 of Article 3 of the Agreement.





Les entités ci-après sont considérées comme des institutions financières canadiennes non déclarantes et des bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés (exempt beneficial owners) pour l’application des articles 1471 et 1472 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis :






II. Exempt Beneficial Owners





A. Banque centrale






The following Entities shall be treated as Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions and as exempt beneficial owners for the purposes of sections 1471 and 1472 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code:





1. La Banque du Canada.






A. Central Bank





B. Organisations internationales






1. The Bank of Canada.





1. Le bureau canadien d’une organisation internationale, au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les missions étrangères et les organisations internationales.






B. International Organizations





C. Fonds de retraite






1. A Canadian office of an international organization as defined under paragraph (1) of Section 2 of the Foreign Missions and International Organizations Act.





1. Tout régime ou arrangement établi au Canada et visé au paragraphe 3 de l’article XVIII (Pensions et rentes) de la Convention, y compris tout régime ou arrangement qui, de l’opinion des autorités compétentes selon l’alinéa 3b) de cet article, est analogue à un régime ou arrangement visé à cet alinéa.






C. Retirement Funds





D. Entité d’investissement appartenant à cent pour cent à des bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés






1. Any plan or arrangement established in Canada and described in paragraph 3 of Article XVIII (Pensions and Annuities) of the Convention, including any plan or arrangement that the Competent Authorities may agree under subparagraph 3(b) of Article XVIII is similar to a plan or arrangement under that subparagraph.





1. Une entité qui est une institution financière canadienne du seul fait qu’elle est une entité d’investissement, pourvu que chaque détenteur direct d’un titre de participation de l’entité soit un bénéficiaire effectif exempté et que chaque détenteur direct d’un titre de créance de l’entité soit ou bien un établissement de dépôt (relativement à un prêt consenti à l’entité) ou bien un bénéficiaire effectif exempté.






D. Investment Entity Wholly Owned by Exempt Beneficial Owners





III. Institutions financières réputées conformes






1. An Entity that is a Canadian Financial Institution solely because it is an Investment Entity, provided that each direct holder of an Equity Interest in the Entity is an exempt beneficial owner, and each direct holder of a debt interest in such Entity is either a Depository Institution (with respect to a loan made to such Entity) or an exempt beneficial owner.





Les institutions financières ci-après sont des institutions financières canadiennes non déclarantes qui sont considérées comme des IFE réputées conformes (deemed-compliant FFI) pour l’application de l’article 1471 de l’Internal Revenue Code des États-Unis.






III. Deemed-Compliant Financial Institutions





A. Institution financière disposant d’une base de clientèle locale






The following Financial Institutions are Non-Reporting Canadian Financial Institutions that shall be treated as deemed-compliant FFIs for the purposes of section 1471 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code:





Toute institution financière qui remplit les conditions nécessaires pour être une IFE locale (local FFI) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, les paragraphes 1, 2 et 3 de la présente sous-section A s’appliquant au lieu des dispositions applicables en cause :






A. Financial Institution with a Local Client Base





1. À compter du 1er juillet 2014 ou d’une date antérieure, l’institution financière doit avoir des règles et des procédures, conformes à celles énoncées à l’annexe I, pour l’empêcher de détenir un compte financier d’une institution financière non participante et pour vérifier si elle ouvre ou tient un compte financier pour toute personne désignée des États-Unis qui n’est pas un résident du Canada (y compris une personne des États-Unis qui était un résident du Canada à la date d’ouverture du compte financier mais qui a cessé de l’être par la suite) ou pour toute EENF passive dont les personnes détenant le contrôle sont des résidents des États-Unis ou des citoyens des États-Unis qui ne sont pas des résidents du Canada;






A Financial Institution that qualifies as a local FFI as described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations, applying subparagraphs A(1), A(2) and A(3) of this section in lieu of the relevant paragraphs in those regulations:





2. Ces règles et procédures doivent prévoir que, si un compte financier détenu par une personne désignée des États-Unis qui n’est pas un résident du Canada ou par une EENF passive dont les personnes détenant le contrôle sont des résidents des États-Unis ou des citoyens des États-Unis qui ne sont pas des résidents du Canada est identifié, l’institution financière doit déclarer ce compte comme si elle était une institution financière canadienne déclarante (notamment en respectant les obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA) ou le clôturer;






1. Beginning on or before July 1, 2014, the Financial Institution must have policies and procedures, consistent with those set forth in Annex I, to prevent the Financial Institution from providing a Financial Account to any Nonparticipating Financial Institution and to monitor whether the Financial Institution opens or maintains a Financial Account for any Specified U.S. Person who is not a resident of Canada (including a U.S. Person that was a resident of Canada when the Financial Account was opened but subsequently ceases to be a resident of Canada) or any Passive NFFE with Controlling Persons who are U.S. residents or U.S. citizens who are not residents of Canada;





3. L’institution financière doit examiner, conformément aux procédures visant les comptes préexistants énoncées à l’annexe I, tout compte préexistant détenu par une personne physique qui n’est pas un résident du Canada ou par une entité afin d’identifier tout compte financier détenu par une personne désignée des États-Unis qui n’est pas un résident du Canada, par une EENF passive dont les personnes détenant le contrôle sont des résidents des États-Unis ou des citoyens des États-Unis qui ne sont pas des résidents du Canada ou par une institution financière non participante. Si un tel compte est découvert, l’institution financière doit le déclarer comme si elle était une institution financière canadienne déclarante (notamment en respectant les obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA) ou le clôturer.






2. Such policies and procedures must provide that if any Financial Account held by a Specified U.S. Person who is not a resident of Canada or by a Passive NFFE with Controlling Persons who are U.S. residents or U.S. citizens who are not residents of Canada is identified, the Financial Institution must report such Financial Account as would be required if the Financial Institution were a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution (including by following the applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website) or close such Financial Account;





B. Banque locale






3. With respect to a Preexisting Account held by an individual who is not a resident of Canada or by an Entity, the Financial Institution must review those Preexisting Accounts in accord-ance with the procedures set forth in Annex I applicable to Preexisting Accounts to identify any Financial Account held by a Specified U.S. Person who is not a resident of Canada, by a Passive NFFE with Controlling Persons who are U.S. residents or U.S. citizens who are not residents of Canada, or by a Nonparticipating Financial Institution, and must report such Financial Account as would be required if the Financial Institution were a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution (including by following the applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website) or close such Financial Account;





Toute institution financière qui remplit les conditions nécessaires pour être une banque locale non assujettie à l’enregistrement (nonregistering local bank) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, compte tenu, s’il y a lieu, des définitions suivantes :






B. Local Bank





1. Le terme « bank » comprend tout établissement de dépôt qui est régi par la Loi sur les banques ou la Loi sur les sociétés de fiducie et de prêt ou qui est une société de fiducie ou de prêt régie par une loi provinciale;






A Financial Institution that qualifies as a nonregistering local bank as described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations, using the following definitions where applicable:





2. Le passage « credit union or similar cooperative credit organization that is operated without profit » comprend toute caisse de crédit ou organisation coopérative de crédit semblable qui a droit à un traitement fiscal plus favorable en ce qui a trait aux distributions faites à ses membres en vertu de la législation canadienne, incluant toute caisse de crédit au sens du paragraphe 137(6) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






1. The term “bank” shall include any Depository Institution to which the Bank Act or the Trust and Loan Companies Act applies, or which is a trust or loan company regulated by a provincial Act; and





C. Institution financière dont tous les comptes sont des comptes de faible valeur






2. The term “credit union or similar cooperative credit organization that is operated without profit” shall include any credit union or similar cooperative credit organization that is entitled to tax-favored treatment with respect to distributions to its members under Canadian law, including any credit union as defined in subsection 137(6) of the Income Tax Act.





Toute institution financière canadienne qui satisfait aux critères suivants :






C. Financial Institution with Only Low-Value Accounts





1. L’institution financière n’est pas une entité d’investissement;






A Canadian Financial Institution satisfying the following requirements:





2. Aucun compte financier tenu par l’institution financière ou par une entité liée n’affiche un solde ou une valeur supérieur à 50 000 $, d’après les règles énoncées à l’annexe I concernant la totalisation des comptes et la conversion des monnaies;






1. The Financial Institution is not an Investment Entity;





3. L’actif au bilan de l’institution financière n’excède pas 50 millions de dollars, et l’actif total au bilan consolidé ou combiné de l’institution financière et des entités liées, prises ensemble, n’excède pas 50 millions de dollars.






2. No Financial Account maintained by the Financial Institution or any Related Entity has a balance or value in excess of $50,000, applying the rules set forth in Annex I for account aggregation and currency translation; and





D. Entité d’investissement et société étrangère contrôlée parrainées






3. The Financial Institution does not have more than $50 million in assets on its balance sheet, and the Financial Institution and any Related Entities, taken together, do not have more than $50 million in total assets on their consolidated or combined balance sheets.





Toute institution financière visée aux paragraphes 1 ou 2 de la présente sous-section D qui a une entité parrain qui satisfait aux critères énoncés au paragraphe 3 de la présente sous-section D.






D. Sponsored Investment Entity and Controlled Foreign Corporation





1. Une institution financière est une entité d’investissement parrainée si, à la fois :






A Financial Institution described in subparagraph D(1) or D(2) of this section having a sponsoring entity that complies with the requirements of subparagraph D(3) of this section.





a) elle est une entité d’investissement établie au Canada qui n’est pas un intermédiaire agréé (qualified intermediary), une société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign partnership) ou une fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue (withholding foreign trust) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






1. A Financial Institution is a sponsored investment entity if:





b) une entité a convenu avec elle d’agir à titre d’entité parrain pour elle.






a) It is an Investment Entity established in Canada that is not a qualified intermediary, withholding foreign partnership, or withholding foreign trust pursuant to relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations; and





2. Une institution financière est une société étrangère contrôlée parrainée si, à la fois :






b) An Entity has agreed with the Financial Institution to act as a sponsoring entity for the Financial Institution.





a) elle est une société étrangère contrôlée1 constituée en vertu de la législation du Canada qui n’est pas un intermédiaire agréé, une société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue ou une fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






2. A Financial Institution is a sponsored controlled foreign corporation if:





1 Le terme « société étrangère contrôlée » s’entend d’une société étrangère (c’est-à-dire, non américaine) dont plus de 50 p. 100 des droits de vote totaux combinés de ses catégories d’actions avec droit de vote, ou de la valeur totale de ses actions, sont détenus, ou sont considérés comme étant détenus, par des « actionnaires des États-Unis » un jour donné de son année d’imposition. Le terme « actionnaire des États-Unis » s’entend, relativement à une société étrangère, d’une personne des États-Unis qui détient, ou qui est considérée comme détenant, au moins 10 p. 100 des droits de vote totaux combinés des catégories d’actions avec droit de vote de la société étrangère.






a) The Financial Institution is a controlled foreign corporation1 organized under the laws of Canada that is not a qualified intermediary, withholding foreign partnership, or withholding foreign trust pursuant to relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





b) elle appartient à cent pour cent, directement ou indirectement, à une institution financière américaine déclarante qui accepte d’agir, ou qui exige d’une filiale de l’institution financière qu’elle agisse, à titre d’entité parrain pour l’institution financière;






1 A “controlled foreign corporation” means any foreign (i.e., non-U.S.) corporation if more than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of such corporation entitled to vote, or the total value of the stock of such corporation, is owned, or is considered as owned, by “United States shareholders” on any day during the taxable year of such foreign corporation. The term a “United States shareholder” means, with respect to any foreign corporation, a United States person who owns, or is considered as owning, 10 percent or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of such foreign corporation.





c) elle partage un système de compte électronique commun avec l’entité parrain qui permet à cette dernière de recenser tous les titulaires de compte et les bénéficiaires de l’institution financière et d’avoir accès à tous les renseignements concernant les comptes et les clients tenus par l’institution financière, y compris, entre autres, les renseignements sur l’identité des clients, les documents d’identification des clients, le solde des comptes et tous les paiements faits au titulaire de compte ou au bénéficiaire.






b) The Financial Institution is wholly owned, directly or indirectly, by a Reporting U.S. Financial Institution that agrees to act, or requires an affiliate of the Financial Institution to act, as a sponsoring entity for the Financial Institution; and





3. L’entité parrain satisfait aux critères suivants :






c) The Financial Institution shares a common electronic account system with the sponsoring entity that enables the sponsoring entity to identify all Account Holders and payees of the Financial Institution and to access all account and customer information maintained by the Financial Institution including, but not limited to, customer identification information, customer documentation, account balance, and all payments made to the Account Holder or payee.





a) elle est autorisée à agir au nom de l’institution financière (par exemple, à titre de gestionnaire de fonds, de fiduciaire, d’administrateur ou d’associé directeur) afin de remplir les obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA;






3. The sponsoring entity complies with the following requirements:





b) elle est enregistrée à titre d’entité parrain auprès de l’IRS sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA;






a) The sponsoring entity is authorized to act on behalf of the Financial Institution (such as a fund manager, trustee, corporate director, or managing partner) to fulfill applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website;





c) si elle identifie des comptes déclarables américains relativement à l’institution financière, elle enregistre l’institution financière conformément aux obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA au plus tard le 31 décembre 2015 ou, si elle est postérieure, à la date qui suit de quatre-vingt-dix jours la date à laquelle un tel compte déclarable américain est initialement identifié;






b) The sponsoring entity has registered as a sponsoring entity with the IRS on the IRS FATCA registration website;





d) elle accepte de remplir, au nom de l’institution financière, toutes les obligations de diligence raisonnable, de déclaration et autres (y compris l’obligation de fournir à tout débiteur direct les renseignements visés à l’alinéa 1e) de l’article 4 de l’Accord) que l’institution financière serait tenue de remplir si elle était une institution financière canadienne déclarante;






c) If the sponsoring entity identifies any U.S. Reportable Accounts with respect to the Financial Institution, the sponsoring entity registers the Financial Institution pursuant to applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website on or before the later of December 31, 2015 and the date that is 90 days after such a U.S. Reportable Account is first identified;





e) elle indique le nom et le numéro d’identification de l’institution financière (obtenu en suivant les obligations d’enregistrement applicables figurant sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA) dans tous les documents remplis au nom de l’institution financière;






d) The sponsoring entity agrees to perform, on behalf of the Financial Institution, all due diligence, reporting, and other requirements (including providing to any immediate payor the information described in subparagraph 1(e) of Article 4 of the Agreement), that the Financial Institution would have been required to perform if it were a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution;





f) son statut de parrain n’a pas été révoqué.






e) The sponsoring entity identifies the Financial Institution and includes the identifying number of the Financial Institution (obtained by following applicable registration requirements on the IRS FATCA registration website) in all reporting completed on the Financial Institution’s behalf; and





E. Mécanisme de placement à peu d’actionnaires parrainé






f) The sponsoring entity has not had its status as a sponsor revoked.





Toute institution financière canadienne qui satisfait aux critères suivants :






E. Sponsored, Closely Held Investment Vehicle





1. L’institution financière est une institution financière du seul fait qu’elle est une entité d’investissement et qu’elle n’est pas un intermédiaire agréé, une société de personnes étrangère effectuant la retenue ou une fiducie étrangère effectuant la retenue selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis;






A Canadian Financial Institution satisfying the following requirements:





2. L’entité parrain est une institution financière américaine déclarante, une IFE déclarante de modèle 1 ou une IFE participante et est autorisée à agir au nom de l’institution financière (par exemple, à titre de gestionnaire professionnel, de fiduciaire ou d’associé directeur);






1. The Financial Institution is a Financial Institution solely because it is an Investment Entity and is not a qualified intermediary, withholding foreign partnership, or withholding foreign trust pursuant to relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





3. L’institution financière ne prétend pas être un mécanisme de placement pour des parties non liées;






2. The sponsoring entity is a Reporting U.S. Financial Institution, Reporting Model 1 FFI, or Participating FFI, and is authorized to act on behalf of the Financial Institution (such as a professional manager, trustee, or managing partner);





4. Au plus vingt personnes physiques détiennent l’ensemble des titres de créance et des titres de participation de l’institution financière (compte non tenu des titres de créance appartenant à des IFE participantes et à des IFE réputées conformes ni des titres de participation appartenant à une entité qui détient 100 p. 100 des titres de participation de l’institution financière et qui est elle-même une institution financière parrainée visée à la présente sous-section E);






3. The Financial Institution does not hold itself out as an investment vehicle for unrelated parties;





5. L’entité parrain satisfait aux critères suivants :






4. Twenty or fewer individuals own all of the debt interests and Equity Interests in the Financial Institution (disregarding debt interests owned by Participating FFIs and deemed-compliant FFIs and Equity Interests owned by an Entity if that Entity owns 100 percent of the Equity Interests in the Financial Institution and is itself a sponsored Financial Institution described in this paragraph E); and





a) elle est enregistrée à titre d’entité parrain auprès de l’IRS sur le site Web de l’IRS pour l’enregistrement se rapportant à la loi FATCA;






5. The sponsoring entity complies with the following requirements:





b) elle accepte de remplir, au nom de l’institution financière, toutes les obligations de diligence raisonnable, de déclaration et autres (y compris l’obligation de fournir à tout débiteur direct les renseignements visés à l’alinéa 1e) de l’article 4 de l’Accord) que celle-ci serait tenue de remplir si elle était une institution financière canadienne déclarante, et elle conserve les documents recueillis relativement à l’institution financière pendant une période de six ans;






a) The sponsoring entity has registered as a sponsoring entity with the IRS on the IRS FATCA registration website;





c) elle indique le nom de l’institution financière dans tous les documents remplis au nom de celle-ci;






b) The sponsoring entity agrees to perform, on behalf of the Financial Institution, all due diligence, reporting, and other requirements (including providing to any immediate payor the information described in subparagraph 1(e) of Article 4 of the Agreement), that the Financial Institution would have been required to perform if it were a Reporting Canadian Financial Institution and retains documentation collected with respect to the Financial Institution for a period of six years;





d) son statut de parrain n’a pas été révoqué.






c) The sponsoring entity identifies the Financial Institution in all reporting completed on the Financial Institution’s behalf; and





F. Fonds affecté






d) The sponsoring entity has not had its status as a sponsor revoked.





Toute institution financière qui remplit les conditions nécessaires pour être un fonds affecté (restricted fund) selon les dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis, les procédures énoncées à l’annexe I, ou exigées en vertu de cette annexe, s’appliquant au lieu des procédures énoncées à l’article 1.1471-4 de ces règlements, ou exigées en vertu de cet article, et les mentions « report » ou « reports » s’appliquant au lieu des mentions « withhold and report » ou « withholds and reports » qui figurent dans les paragraphes pertinents de ces mêmes règlements, pourvu qu’elle fournisse à tout débiteur direct les renseignements visés à l’alinéa 1e) de l’article 4 de l’Accord ou qu’elle remplisse les exigences prévues à l’alinéa 1d) de cet article, selon le cas.






F. Restricted Fund





G. Les sociétés à capital de risque de travailleurs visées à l’article 6701 du Règlement de l’impôt sur le revenu.






A Financial Institution that qualifies as a restricted fund as described in relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations, applying the procedures set forth in, or required under, Annex I in lieu of the procedures set forth in, or required under, Treasury Regulation section 1.1471-4, and applying references to “report” or “reports” in lieu of references in relevant paragraphs in those regulations to “withhold and report” or “withholds and reports”, provided that the Financial Institution provides to any immediate payor the information described in subparagraph 1(e) of Article 4 of the Agreement, or fulfills the requirements described in subparagraph 1(d) of Article 4 of the Agreement, as applicable.





H. Toute coopérative de crédit centrale, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les associations coopératives de crédit, dont les comptes sont tenus pour les institutions financières membres.






G. Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations prescribed under section 6701 of the Income Tax Regulations.





I. Toute entité visée au paragraphe 3 de l’article XXI (Organisations exonérées) de la Convention.






H. Any Central Cooperative Credit Society as defined in section 2 of the Cooperative Credit Associations Act and whose accounts are maintained for member financial institutions.





J. Une entité d’investissement établie au Canada qui est régie à titre de mécanisme de placement collectif, pourvu que toutes les participations dans ce mécanisme (y compris les titres de créance de plus de 50 000 $) soient détenues par un ou plusieurs bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés, EENF actives visées au paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la section VI de l’annexe I, personnes des États-Unis qui ne sont pas des personnes désignées des États-Unis ou institutions financières qui ne sont pas des institutions financières non participantes, ou par leur entremise.






I. Any entity described in paragraph 3 of Article XXI (Exempt Organizations) of the Convention.





K. Règles spéciales






J. An Investment Entity established in Canada that is regulated as a collective investment vehicle, provided that all of the interests in the collective investment vehicle (including debt interests in excess of $50,000) are held by or through one or more exempt beneficial owners, Active NFFEs described in subparagraph B(4) of section VI of Annex I, U.S. Persons that are not Specified U.S. Persons, or Financial Institutions that are not Nonparticipating Financial Institutions.





Les règles ci-après s’appliquent à une entité d’investissement :






K. Special Rules





1. S’agissant de participations dans une entité d’investissement qui est un mécanisme de placement collectif visé à la sous-section J de la présente section, les obligations en matière de déclaration de toute entité d’investissement, sauf une institution financière par l’intermédiaire de laquelle des participations dans le mécanisme de placement collectif sont détenues, sont réputées être remplies.






The following rules apply to an Investment Entity:





2. S’agissant de participations dans les entités ci-après, les obligations en matière de déclaration de toute entité d’investissement qui est une institution financière canadienne, sauf une institution financière par l’intermédiaire de laquelle les participations dans le mécanisme de placement collectif sont détenues, sont réputées être remplies :






1. With respect to interests in an Investment Entity that is a collective investment vehicle described in paragraph J of this section, the reporting obligations of any Investment Entity (other than a Financial Institution through which interests in the collective investment vehicle are held) shall be deemed fulfilled.





a) une entité d’investissement établie dans une juridiction partenaire qui est régie à titre de mécanisme de placement collectif et dont l’ensemble des participations (y compris les titres de créance de plus de 50 000 $) sont détenues par un ou plusieurs bénéficiaires effectifs exemptés, EENF actives visées au paragraphe 4 de la sous-section B de la section VI de l’annexe I, personnes des États-Unis qui ne sont pas des personnes désignées des États-Unis ou institutions financières qui ne sont pas des institutions financières non participantes, ou par leur entremise;






2. With respect to interests in:





b) une entité d’investissement qui est un mécanisme de placement collectif admissible (qualified collective investment vehicle) en vertu des dispositions applicables des Treasury Regulations des États-Unis.






a) An Investment Entity established in a Partner Jurisdiction that is regulated as a collective investment vehicle, all of the interests in which (including debt interests in excess of $50,000) are held by or through one or more exempt beneficial owners, Active NFFEs described in subparagraph B(4) of section VI of Annex I, U.S. Persons that are not Specified U.S. Persons, or Financial Institutions that are not Nonparticipating Financial Institutions; or





3. S’agissant de participations dans une entité d’investissement donnée qui est établie au Canada et qui n’est pas visée à la sous-section J, ou au paragraphe 2 de la sous-section K, de la présente section, conformément au paragraphe 3 de l’article 5 de l’Accord, les obligations en matière de déclaration de toutes les autres entités d’investissement relativement à ces participations sont réputées être remplies si les renseignements à déclarer par l’entité d’investissement donnée selon l’Accord relativement à ces participations sont déclarés par celle-ci ou par une autre personne.






b) An Investment Entity that is a qualified collective investment vehicle under relevant U.S. Treasury Regulations;





IV. Comptes exclus des comptes financiers






the reporting obligations of any Investment Entity that is a Canadian Financial Institution (other than a Financial Institution through which interests in the collective investment vehicle are held) shall be deemed fulfilled.





Les comptes et les produits ci-après établis au Canada et tenus par une institution financière canadienne sont considérés comme étant exclus du champ d’application de la définition de « compte financier ». Par conséquent, ils ne sont pas considérés comme des comptes déclarables américains en vertu de l’Accord.






3. With respect to interests in an Investment Entity established in Canada that is not described in paragraph J or subparagraph K(2) of this section, consistent with paragraph 3 of Article 5 of the Agreement, the reporting obligations of all other Investment Entities with respect to such interests shall be deemed fulfilled if the information required to be reported by the first-mentioned Investment Entity pursuant to the Agreement with respect to such interests is reported by such Investment Entity or another person.





A. Régimes enregistrés d’épargne-retraite (REER) – au sens du paragraphe 146(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






IV. Accounts Excluded from Financial Accounts





B. Fonds enregistrés de revenu de retraite (FERR) – au sens du paragraphe 146.3(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






The following accounts and products established in Canada and maintained by a Canadian Financial Institution shall be treated as excluded from the definition of Financial Accounts, and therefore shall not be treated as U.S. Reportable Accounts under the Agreement:





C. Régimes de pension agréés collectifs (RPAC) – au sens du paragraphe 147.5(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






A. Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSPs) — as defined in subsection 146(1) of the Income Tax Act.





D. Régimes de pension agréés (RPA) – au sens du paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






B. Registered Retirement Income Funds (RRIFs) — as defined in subsection 146.3(1) of the Income Tax Act.





E. Comptes d’épargne libre d’impôt (CELI) – au sens du paragraphe 146.2(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






C. Pooled Registered Pension Plans (PRPPs) — as defined in subsection 147.5(1) of the Income Tax Act.





F. Régimes enregistrés d’épargne-invalidité (REEI) – au sens du paragraphe 146.4(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






D. Registered Pension Plans (RPPs) — as defined in subsection 248(1) of the Income Tax Act.





G. Régimes enregistrés d’épargne-études (REEE) – au sens du paragraphe 146.1(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






E. Tax-Free Savings Accounts (TFSAs) — as defined in subsection 146.2(1) of the Income Tax Act.





H. Régimes de participation différée aux bénéfices (RPDB) – au sens du paragraphe 147(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






F. Registered Disability Savings Plans (RDSPs) — as defined in subsection 146.4(1) of the Income Tax Act.





I. Comptes Agri-investissement – visés par les définitions de « second fonds du compte de stabilisation du revenu net » et « compte de stabilisation du revenu net » au paragraphe 248(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu, y compris le programme québécois Agri-Québec visé à l’article 5503 du Règlement de l’impôt sur le revenu.






G. Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs) — as defined in subsection 146.1(1) of the Income Tax Act.





J. Arrangements de services funéraires – au sens du paragraphe 148.1(1) de la Loi de l’impôt sur le revenu.






H. Deferred Profit Sharing Plans (DPSPs) — as defined in subsection 147(1) of the Income Tax Act.





K. Comptes de garantie bloqués – un compte tenu au Canada qui a été ouvert dans le cadre de l’un des éléments suivants :






I. AgriInvest accounts — as defined under “NISA Fund No. 2” and “net income stabilization account” in subsection 248(1) of the Income Tax Act including Quebec’s Agri-Quebec program as prescribed in section 5503 of the Income Tax Regulations.





1. Une ordonnance d’un tribunal ou une décision judiciaire.






J. Eligible Funeral Arrangements – as defined under subsection 148.1 of the Income Tax Act.





2. La vente, l’échange ou la location d’un bien immeuble ou réel ou d’un bien meuble ou personnel, pourvu que le compte satisfasse aux critères suivants :






K. Escrow Accounts. An account maintained in Canada established in connection with any of the following:





a) le compte est financé soit uniquement par un acompte, un dépôt, le dépôt d’une somme suffisante pour assurer l’exécution d’une obligation directement liée à l’opération en cause ou un paiement similaire, soit par un actif financier qui est déposé dans le compte relativement à la vente, à l’échange ou à la location du bien;






1. 	A court order or judgment.





b) le compte est ouvert et sert uniquement à assurer l’exécution de l’obligation de l’acheteur de payer le prix d’achat du bien, du vendeur de payer tout passif éventuel ou du bailleur ou locataire de payer tout dommage lié au bien loué selon ce qui est convenu dans le bail;






2. A sale, exchange, or lease of real or immovable property or of personal or movable property, provided that the account satisfies the following requirements:





c) les actifs du compte, y compris le revenu tiré afférent, seront payés ou autrement distribués au profit de l’acheteur, du vendeur, du bailleur ou du locataire (y compris dans le but de remplir l’obligation d’une telle personne) au moment de la vente, de l’échange ou de la cession du bien ou à la fin du bail;






a) The account is funded solely with a down payment, earnest money, deposit in an amount appropriate to secure an obligation directly related to the transaction, or a similar payment, or is funded with a financial asset that is deposited in the account in connection with the sale, exchange, or lease of the property;





d) le compte n’est pas un compte sur marge ni un compte similaire ouvert relativement à la vente ou à l’échange d’un actif financier;






b) The account is established and used solely to secure the obligation of the purchaser to pay the purchase price for the property, the seller to pay any contingent liability, or the lessor or lessee to pay for any damages relating to the leased property as agreed under the lease;





e) le compte n’est pas associé à un compte de carte de crédit.






c) The assets of the account, including the income earned thereon, will be paid or otherwise distributed for the benefit of the purchaser, seller, lessor, or lessee (including to satisfy such person’s obligation) when the property is sold, exchanged, or surrendered, or the lease terminates;





3. L’obligation d’une institution financière qui assure le service d’un prêt garanti par un bien immeuble ou réel de mettre en réserve une partie d’un paiement à seule fin de faciliter le paiement ultérieur de taxes ou d’assurance liées au bien.






d) The account is not a margin or similar account established in connection with a sale or exchange of a financial asset; and





4. L’obligation d’une institution financière à seule fin de faciliter le paiement ultérieur de taxes ou d’impôts.






e) The account is not associated with a credit card account.





L. Comptes tenus au Canada et exclus du champ d’application de la définition de « compte financier » en vertu d’un accord conclu entre les États-Unis et une autre juridiction partenaire afin de faciliter la mise en œuvre de la loi FATCA, pourvu que ces comptes soient assujettis aux mêmes exigences et contrôles selon la législation de cette autre juridiction partenaire que s’ils avaient été ouverts dans cette juridiction partenaire auprès d’une institution financière d’une juridiction partenaire située dans cette juridiction partenaire.






3. An obligation of a Financial Institution servicing a loan secured by real or immovable property to set aside a portion of a payment solely to facilitate the payment of taxes or insurance related to the real or immovable property at a later time.










4. An obligation of a Financial Institution solely to facilitate the payment of taxes at a later time.










L. An account maintained in Canada and excluded from the definition of Financial Account under an agreement between the United States and another Partner Jurisdiction to facilitate the implementation of FATCA, provided that such account is subject to the same requirements and oversight under the laws of such other Partner Jurisdiction as if such account were established in that Partner Jurisdiction and maintained by a Partner Jurisdiction Financial Institution in that Partner Jurisdiction.




















SCHEDULE 4 





ANNEXE 4 






(Section 128)





(article 128)






SCHEDULE 1 





ANNEXE 1 






(Paragraph 12(j))





(alinéa 12j))






NON-APPLICATION OF PART II





NON-APPLICATION DE LA PARTIE II






1. Any pest control product as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Pest Control Products Act





1. Produits antiparasitaires au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur les produits antiparasitaires






2. Any explosive as defined in section 2 of the Explosives Act





2. Explosifs au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les explosifs






3. Any cosmetic, device, drug or food, as defined in section 2 of the Food and Drugs Act





3. Cosmétiques, instruments, drogues ou aliments, au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi sur les aliments et drogues






4. Any consumer product as defined in section 2 of the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act





4. Produits de consommation au sens de l’article 2 de la Loi canadienne sur la sécurité des produits de consommation






5. Any wood or product made of wood





5. Bois ou produits en bois






SCHEDULE 2 





ANNEXE 2 






(Section 2)





(article 2)






HAZARD CLASSES





CLASSES DE DANGER






Physical Hazard Classes





Classes de dangers physiques






1. Explosives





1. Matières et objets explosibles






2. Flammable gases





2. Gaz inflammables






3. Flammable aerosols





3. Aérosols inflammables






4. Oxidizing gases





4. Gaz comburants






5. Gases under pressure





5. Gaz sous pression






6. Flammable liquids





6. Liquides inflammables






7. Flammable solids





7. Matières solides inflammables






8. Self-reactive substances and mixtures





8. Matières autoréactives






9. Pyrophoric liquids





9. Liquides pyrophoriques






10. Pyrophoric solids





10. Matières solides pyrophoriques






11. Self-heating substances and mixtures





11. Matières auto-échauffantes






12. Substances and mixtures which, in contact with water, emit flammable gases





12. Matières qui, au contact de l’eau, dégagent des gaz inflammables






13. Oxidizing liquids





13. Liquides comburants






14. Oxidizing solids





14. Matières solides comburantes






15. Organic peroxides





15. Peroxydes organiques






16. Corrosive to metals





16. Matières corrosives pour les métaux






17. Combustible dusts





17. Poussières combustibles






18. Simple asphyxiants





18. Asphyxiants simples






19. Pyrophoric gases





19. Gaz pyrophoriques






20. Physical hazards not otherwise classified





20. Dangers physiques non classifiés ailleurs















Health Hazard Classes





Classes de danger pour la santé






1. Acute toxicity





1. Toxicité aiguë






2. Skin corrosion/irritation





2. Corrosion cutanée / Irritation cutanée






3. Serious eye damage/eye irritation





3. Lésions oculaires graves / Irritation oculaire






4. Respiratory or skin sensitization





4. Sensibilisation respiratoire ou cutanée






5. Germ cell mutagenicity





5. Mutagénicité sur les cellules germinales






6. Carcinogenicity





6. Cancérogénicité






7. Reproductive toxicity





7. Toxicité pour la reproduction






8. Specific target organ toxicity — single exposure





8. Toxicité pour certains organes cibles — Exposition unique






9. Specific target organ toxicity — repeated exposure





9. Toxicité pour certains organes cibles — Expositions répétées






10. Aspiration hazard





10. Danger par aspiration






11. Biohazardous infectious materials





11. Matières infectieuses présentant un danger biologique






12. Health hazards not otherwise classified





12. Dangers pour la santé non classifiés ailleurs
















SCHEDULE 5 





ANNEXE 5 






(Section 170)





(article 170)






SCHEDULE 





ANNEXE 






(Section 21)





(article 21)














OFFICERS




1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.


General
Lieutenant-General
Major-General
Brigadier-General
Colonel
Lieutenant-Colonel
Major
Captain
Lieutenant
Second Lieutenant
Officer Cadet




NON-COMMISSIONED MEMBERS




12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.


Chief Warrant Officer
Master Warrant Officer
Warrant Officer
Sergeant
Corporal
Private


















OFFICIERS




1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.


Général
Lieutenant-général
Major-général
Brigadier-général
Colonel
Lieutenant-colonel
Major
Capitaine
Lieutenant
Sous-lieutenant
Élève-officier




MILITAIRES DU RANG




12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.


Adjudant-chef
Adjudant-maître
Adjudant
Sergent
Caporal
Soldat





















SCHEDULE 6 





ANNEXE 6 






(Section 376)





(article 376)






SCHEDULE 





ANNEXE 






(Section 2)





(article 2)






ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS





TRIBUNAUX ADMINISTRATIFS






Canada Industrial Relations Board 





Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels






Conseil canadien des relations industrielles 





Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board






Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board 





Commission de révision






Commission canadienne d’examen des exportations de biens culturels 





Review Tribunal






Canadian Human Rights Tribunal





Conseil canadien des relations industrielles






Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne 





Canada Industrial Relations Board






Canadian International Trade Tribunal 





Tribunal canadien des droits de la personne






Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur





Canadian Human Rights Tribunal






Competition Tribunal 





Tribunal canadien du commerce extérieur






Tribunal de la concurrence





Canadian International Trade Tribunal 






Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal 





Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada






Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles 





Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada






Review Tribunal





Tribunal de la concurrence






Commission de révision





Competition Tribunal 






Specific Claims Tribunal 





Tribunal de la protection des fonctionnaires divulgateurs d’actes répréhensibles






Tribunal des revendications particulières 





Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal






Social Security Tribunal





Tribunal de la sécurité sociale






Tribunal de la sécurité sociale 





Social Security Tribunal






Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada 





Tribunal des revendications particulières






 Tribunal d’appel des transports du Canada





Specific Claims Tribunal






Published under authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons





Publié avec l'autorisation du président de la Chambre des communes














