





2nd Session, 35th Parliament,
45-46 Elizabeth II, 1996-97










The House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-400









An Act to amend the Canada Elections Act 
(registration of political parties)







R.S., c. E-2; 
R.S., c. 27 
(2nd Suppl.); 
1989, c. 28; 
1990, cc. 16, 
17; 1991, cc. 
11, 47; 1992, 
cc. 1, 21, 51; 
1993, c. 19; 
1994, c. 26; 
1995, c. 5


Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









1. (1) Paragraph 24(2)(a) of the Canada 
Elections Act is replaced by the following:










(a) where he determines that, on the 
nomination by the party of twelve  
candidates in accordance with paragraph 
(3)(a) or (b), whichever is applicable, the 
party could be registered, so inform the 
leader of the party; or









(2) Subsection 24(3) of the Act is replaced 
by the following:







Effective date 
of registration


(3) Where the leader of a political party has 
been informed by the Chief Electoral Officer 
pursuant to paragraph (2)(a) that, on the 
nomination of twelve  candidates in 
accordance with paragraph (a) or (b), 
whichever is applicable, the political party 
could be registered, the party shall be 
registered










(a) if the application for registration is filed 
within the period commencing with the day 
following polling day at one general 
election and terminating on the sixtieth day 
before the issue of writs for the next general 
election, on the day after the party has 
officially nominated candidates in twelve  
electoral districts at the next general 
election, or









(b) if the application for registration is filed 
within the period commencing with the 
fifty-ninth day before the issue of writs for 
a general election and terminating on 
polling day at that election, on the day after 
the party has officially nominated 
candidates in twelve  electoral districts at 
the general election next following the 
general election falling within that period,









and if the political party fails to nominate 
twelve  candidates in accordance with 
paragraph (a) or (b), whichever is applicable, 
the Chief Electoral Officer shall inform the 
leader of the party that the party cannot be 
registered.










2. Subsection 28(2) of the Act is replaced 
by the following:







Deletions 
from registry


(2) The Chief Electoral Officer shall, on the 
close of nominations at a general election, 
delete from the registry referred to in 
subsection 24(1), any registered party that did 
not at the close of nominations on that day 
have candidates in at least twelve  of the 
electoral districts.










3. (1) Paragraph 31(1)(a) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










(a) has been informed by the Chief 
Electoral Officer pursuant to paragraph 
24(2)(a) that, on the nomination of twelve  
candidates in accordance with 
paragraph 24(3)(a) or (b), whichever is 
applicable, the party could be registered, 
and









(2) Subsections 31(11) to (15) of the Act 
are repealed.










4. Subsection 33(2) of the English version 
of the Act is replaced by the following:







Application 
for 
registration


(2) Every political party that makes 
application for registration pursuant to 
subsection 24(1) and whose leader is informed 
by the Chief Electoral Officer pursuant to 
paragraph 24(2)(a) that, on the nomination of 
twelve  candidates in accordance with 
paragraph 24(3)(a) or (b), whichever is 
applicable, the party could be registered shall, 
within thirty days after being so informed, file 
with the Chief Electoral Officer a notification 
signed by the leader of the party or the chief 
agent of the party, setting out the names and 
addresses of all agents of the party other than 
the chief agent and, on registration of the 
political party, the information shall be 
recorded by the Chief Electoral Officer in the 
registry referred to in subsection (1).










5. Paragraph 81(1)(j) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:










(j) the amount of $500  must be deposited 
with the returning officer at the same time 
as the nomination paper and one half of the 
deposit shall be returned to the candidate on 
satisfaction of the conditions set out in 
paragraph 84(3)(a), while the other half 
shall be returned on satisfaction of the 
conditions set out in paragraph 84(3)(b);







