
Third Session, Thirty-seventh Parliament,
52-53 Elizabeth II, 2004
STATUTES OF CANADA 2004
CHAPTER 29
An Act to amend the Act of incorporation of Queen’s Theological College
ASSENTED TO
1st APRIL, 2004
BILL S-15


Summary
This enactment amends the original Act of incorporation of Queen’s Theological College by
(a) changing the composition and role of the Board of Management of the Corporation;
(b) changing the representation of the College at the Senate of Queen’s University at Kingston; and
(c) making technical or incidental amendments to the Act.

Available on the Parliament of Canada Web Site at the following address:
http://www.parl.gc.ca

52-53 ELIZABETH II
——————
CHAPTER 29
An Act to amend the Act of incorporation of Queen’s Theological College
[Assented to 1st April, 2004]
Preamble
WHEREAS Queen’s Theological College has by its petition prayed that its Act of incorporation, being chapter 139 of the Statutes of Canada, 1912, be amended in order to effect certain changes in the composition and role of the Board of Management of Queen’s Theological College, in the representation of the College at the Senate of Queen’s University at Kingston and to make such other technical or incidental changes to the Act;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to grant the prayer of the petition;
1912, c. 139
NOW, THEREFORE, Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of An Act to incorporate Queen’s Theological College is replaced by the following:
Interpretation
1. The following definitions apply in this Act:
“Board”
« Conseil »
“Board” means the Board of Management of Queen’s Theological College.
“College”
« Collège »
“College” means Queen’s Theological College.
“Faculty”
« Faculté »
“Faculty” means Faculty of Theology in Queen’s College at Kingston.
“General Council”
« Conseil général »
“General Council” means the General Council of the United Church of Canada.
“Queen’s College at Kingston”
« Queen’s College à Kingston »
“Queen’s College at Kingston” means Queen’s University at Kingston.
“University”
« Université »
“University” means Queen’s University at Kingston.
2. Section 2 of the Act is replaced by the following:
Corporation continued
2. Queen’s Theological College, created by chapter 139 of the Statutes of Canada, 1912, is continued as a corporation consisting of members of the United Church of Canada.
3. Section 5 of the Act is repealed.
4. Section 8 of the Act is replaced by the following:
University
8. The College is declared to be affiliated with the University.
5. Section 9 of the Act is repealed.
6. Section 11 of the Act is replaced by the following:
Appointment or removal of principal or professors of theology
11. (1) The Board may, subject to the approval of the General Council, appoint or remove from office the principal of the College and the professors of theology in the College.
Appointment or removal of professors
(2) The Board may, without the approval of the General Council, appoint or remove all professors in the College other than professors of theology.
7. Section 12 of the Act is replaced by the following:
Constitution of Board
12. (1) The Board shall consist of members appointed, in such manner and for such periods as may be provided for, by the General Council.
Composition of Board
(2) The Board shall consist of such number of members as may be determined by the Board, a majority of whom shall be members of the United Church of Canada.
Appointment
(3) The General Council shall annually appoint members to the Board to succeed those who have retired.
Reappointment
(4) Members of the Board who retire are eligible for reappointment.
Vacancy
(5) Vacancies by reason of the death, resignation, or disability of a member of the Board or for any other cause, may be filled by the continuing members of the Board, subject to confirmation of the appointment by the General Council.
8. Section 13 of the Act is replaced by the following:
By-laws
13. The Board may also, subject to the approval of the General Council, make rules and by-laws for the government of the College, and the Board may also, subject as aforesaid, constitute a Senate for the College with such powers as it deems expedient.
9. Section 14 of the Act is replaced as follows:
University Senate
14. The Principal of the College, one professor elected by the professors of the College, and one student elected by students registered in an academic program of the College shall be members of the Senate of the University.
10. Section 16 of the Act is repealed.
