






42-43-44 ELIZABETH II









CHAPTER 1









An Act to establish the Department of Industry 
and to amend and repeal certain other 
Acts










[Assented to 16th Mars, 1995] 










Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









SHORT TITLE






Short title


1. This Act may be cited as the Department 
of Industry Act.










ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT






Department 
established


2. (1) There is hereby established a 
department of the Government of Canada 
called the Department of Industry over which 
the Minister of Industry, appointed by 
commission under the Great Seal, shall 
preside.







Minister


(2) The Minister holds office during 
pleasure and has the management and 
direction of the Department.







Registrar 
General


(3) The Minister is the Registrar General of 
Canada.







Deputy 
Minister


3. The Governor in Council may appoint an 
officer called the Deputy Minister of Industry 
to hold office during pleasure and to be the 
deputy head of the Department.










PART I









POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF 
THE MINISTER






Powers, duties 
and functions


4. (1) The powers, duties and functions of 
the Minister extend to and include all matters 
over which Parliament has jurisdiction, not by 
law assigned to any other department, board or 
agency of the Government of Canada, relating 
to










(a) industry and technology in Canada;









(b) trade and commerce in Canada;









(c) science in Canada;









(d) consumer affairs;









(e) corporations and corporate securities;









(f) competition and restraint of trade, 
including mergers and monopolies;









(g) bankruptcy and insolvency;









(h) patents, copyrights, trade-marks, 
industrial designs and integrated circuit 
topographies;









(i) standards of identity, packaging and 
performance in relation to consumer 
products and services, except in relation to 
the safety of consumer goods;









(j) legal metrology;









(k) telecommunications, except in relation 
to









(i) the planning and coordination of 
telecommunication services for 
departments, boards and agencies of the 
Government of Canada, and









(ii) broadcasting, other than in relation to 
spectrum management and the technical 
aspects of broadcasting;









(l) the development and utilization 
generally of communication undertakings, 
facilities, systems and services for Canada;









(m) investment;









(n) small businesses; and









(o) tourism.






Additional 
powers, duties 
and functions


(2) The powers, duties and functions of the 
Minister also extend to and include all matters 
over which Parliament has jurisdiction, not by 
law assigned to any other department, board or 
agency of the Government of Canada, relating 
to regional economic development in Ontario 
and Quebec.







Objectives


5. The Minister shall exercise the powers 
and perform the duties and functions assigned 
by subsection 4(1) in a manner that will










(a) strengthen the national economy and 
promote sustainable development;









(b) promote the mobility of goods, services 
and factors of production and of trade and 
commerce in Canada;









(c) increase the international 
competitiveness of Canadian industry, 
goods and services and assist in the 
adjustment to changing domestic and 
international conditions;









(d) encourage the fullest and most efficient 
and effective development and use of 
science and technology;









(e) foster and promote science and 
technology in Canada;









(f) strengthen the framework for the 
development and efficiency of the 
Canadian marketplace;









(g) promote the establishment, 
development and efficiency of Canadian 
communications systems and facilities and 
assist in the adjustment to changing 
domestic and international conditions;









(h) stimulate investment; and









(i) promote the interests and protection of 
Canadian consumers.






Functions


6. In exercising the powers and performing 
the duties and functions assigned by 
subsection 4(1), the Minister shall










(a) initiate, recommend, coordinate, direct, 
promote and implement national policies, 
programs, projects and practices with 
respect to the objectives set out in 
section 5;









(b) collect, gather, by survey or otherwise, 
compile, analyse, coordinate and 
disseminate information in respect of 
matters under the Minister's 
administration, as well as in relation to 
trends and developments, both within and 
outside Canada, in respect of those matters;









(c) promote, assist and provide support 
services for, and investment in, Canadian 
industry, goods, services, science and 
technology;









(d) promote cooperation with the 
governments of provinces and their 
agencies and non-governmental entities in 
Canada and participate, as appropriate, in 
the promotion of cooperation with agencies 
of other nations and international agencies; 
and









(e) take any action that may be necessary to 
secure, by international regulation or 
otherwise, the rights of Canada in 
communications matters.






Inspection 
services


7. The Minister shall provide the inspection 
services for the protection of Canadians that 
the Minister considers necessary for the 
enforcement of any Act under the Minister's 
administration, or as the Governor in Council 
may direct the Minister to provide, and may 
designate any person as an inspector for the 
purpose of providing those services.










PART II









REGIONAL ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT IN ONTARIO AND 
QUEBEC






Objectives in 
relation to 
regional 
development 
in Ontario and 
Quebec


8. The Minister shall exercise the powers 
and perform the duties and functions assigned 
by subsection 4(2) in a manner that will










(a) promote economic development in 
areas of Ontario and Quebec where low 
incomes and slow economic growth are 
prevalent or where opportunities for 
productive employment are inadequate;









(b) emphasize long-term economic 
development and sustainable employment 
and income creation; and









(c) focus on small and medium-sized 
enterprises and the development and 
enhancement of entrepreneurial talent.






Duties in 
relation to 
regional 
development 
in Ontario and 
Quebec


9. (1) In exercising the powers and 
performing the duties and functions assigned 
by subsection 4(2), the Minister shall, with 
respect to regional economic development in 
Ontario and Quebec,










(a) in cooperation with other concerned 
ministers and boards and agencies of the 
Government of Canada, formulate and 
implement policies, plans and integrated 
federal approaches;









(b) coordinate the policies and programs of 
the Government of Canada;









(c) lead and coordinate the activities of the 
Government of Canada in the establishment 
of cooperative relationships with Ontario 
and Quebec and with business, labour and 
other public and private bodies; and









(d) collect, gather, by survey or otherwise, 
compile, analyse, coordinate and 
disseminate information.






Coordination


(2) In exercising the powers and performing 
the same duties and functions, the Minister 
may










(a) provide and, where appropriate, 
coordinate services promoting regional 
economic development in Ontario and 
Quebec including services to develop 
entrepreneurial talent, support local 
business associations, stimulate investment 
and support small and medium-sized 
enterprises in those provinces or any part 
thereof; and









(b) initiate, recommend, coordinate, direct, 
promote and implement programs and 
projects in relation to regional economic 
development in Ontario and Quebec.






Regulations


10. The Governor in Council may make 
regulations










(a) relating to policies, programs and 
projects referred to in section 9; and









(b) generally for carrying out the purposes 
and provisions of sections 8 and 9.









PART III









POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF 
THE REGISTRAR GENERAL OF 
CANADA






Powers, duties 
and functions


11. (1) The Registrar General of Canada 
shall register all instruments of summons, 
proclamations, commissions, letters patent, 
letters patent of land, writs and other 
instruments and documents issued under the 
Great Seal, and all bonds, warrants of 
extradition, warrants for removal of prisoners, 
leases, releases, deeds of sale, surrenders and 
all other instruments requiring registration.







Deputy 
Registrars 
General


(2) The Registrar General may appoint one 
or more Deputy Registrars General from 
among the officials of the Department and 
delegate to them such duties and functions as 
the Registrar General deems appropriate.







Powers


(3) A Deputy Registrar General may sign 
and certify the registration of all instruments 
and documents required to be registered and 
all copies of those instruments and documents 
or of any records in the custody of the 
Registrar General that are required to be 
certified or authenticated as being copies of 
any such instruments, documents or records.







Special 
statutory 
references


12. Where in any special Act of Parliament 
enacted before December 21, 1967, any 
person is required to file or register any 
instrument of trust, mortgage, hypothec, 
bond, charge, lease, sale, bailment, 
assignment, surrender or other instrument, 
document or record or copy thereof, or any 
notice, in the office or department of the 
Secretary of State, the filing or registration 
required shall be made with the Registrar 
General unless the Governor in Council by 
order designates another office or department 
for such filing or registration.










PART IV









GENERAL






Special 
assistance


13. (1) Where the Governor in Council is of 
the opinion that it is in the national interest to 
do so, the Minister may, in exercising the 
powers and performing the duties and 
functions assigned by subsection 4(1), 
develop and implement programs and projects 
of special assistance to industries, particular 
industrial or commercial establishments, 
organizations, persons who are members of a 
particular category of persons defined by 
order of the Governor in Council or particular 
persons to aid economic development, 
whether through the restructuring, adjusting, 
rationalizing, establishing or re-establishing, 
modernizing, expanding or contracting of an 
industry or particular industrial or commercial 
establishment or organization in Canada, or 
otherwise.







Contents of 
order


(2) Where the Governor in Council makes 
an order pursuant to subsection (1), the 
Governor in Council shall also specify or 
authorize, as the case may be, the actions 
described in subsection 14(1).







Financial 
assistance


14. (1) To facilitate the implementation of 
any program or project of the Minister under 
this Act, the Minister may










(a) make loans to any person;









(b) guarantee the repayment of, or provide 
loan insurance or credit insurance in respect 
of, any financial obligation undertaken by 
any person; and









(c) make grants and contributions to any 
person.






Stock options


(2) Subject to any regulations made under 
subsection (3), the Minister may acquire, 
exercise, assign or sell a stock option or other 
financial or similar instrument obtained as a 
condition under which a loan or contribution 
was made, guarantee given or loan insurance 
or credit insurance provided under 
subsection (1).







Regulations


(3) The Governor in Council may, on the 
recommendation of the Minister and the 
Minister of Finance, make regulations










(a) relating to loans that may be made, 
guarantees that may be given and loan 
insurance and credit insurance that may be 
provided under this section; and









(b) specifying the circumstances in which 
and the manner in which the Minister may 
acquire, exercise, assign or sell a stock 
option, or another financial or similar 
instrument, obtained as a condition under 
which a loan or contribution was made, 
guarantee given or loan insurance or credit 
insurance provided under this section.






Insurance a 
guarantee


(4) For greater certainty, loan insurance or 
credit insurance provided under 
subsection (1) constitutes a guarantee for the 
purposes of the Financial Administration Act.







Committees


15. The Minister may, with the approval of 
the Governor in Council, establish advisory 
and other committees to advise or assist the 
Minister or to exercise such powers and 
perform such duties and functions as the 
Governor in Council may specify, and may fix 
the remuneration and expenses to be paid to 
the members of the committees so established.







Access to 
certain 
information


16. (1) The Minister of National Revenue 
shall, notwithstanding any other Act, on 
request of the Minister, make available to the 
Minister copies of invoices and other 
information collected under the Customs Act 
on goods imported into Canada and exported 
from Canada for the purpose of carrying out 
duties and functions of the Minister under 
paragraph 6(b).







Confidentialit
y


(2) No person employed in the public 
service of Canada who comes into possession 
of information made available to the Minister 
under this section shall disclose any such 
information relating to a particular person, 
organization or business unless the disclosure 
is consented to in writing by the person or 
organization or the owner of the business.







Exception


(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), in 
carrying out duties and functions under 
paragraph 6(b), the Minister may publish lists 
of names and addresses of some or all 
importers or exporters of a product or group of 
products with trade values aggregated in such 
a manner as to protect the confidentiality of 
data concerning individual importers or 
exporters.







Further duties


17. (1) The Minister, in exercising powers 
and performing duties and functions under 
this Act,










(a) shall, where appropriate, make use of 
the services, facilities, information and 
expertise of other departments, boards or 
agencies of the Government of Canada; and









(b) may consult with, and organize 
conferences of, representatives of 
provincial governments, business and 
labour and other public and private entities.






Other powers


(2) In exercising the powers and performing 
the duties and functions under this Act, the 
Minister may enter into agreements with the 
government of any province or any agency 
thereof, or with any other entity or person, and 
may make disbursements up to an amount 
equal to the aggregate of the amounts to be 
contributed by all parties to the agreement, 
even before those amounts have been 
contributed.








