





1st Session, 37th Parliament,
49-50 Elizabeth II, 










House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-253









An Act to amend the Canada Marine Act







1998, c. 10


Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









1. Section 2 of the Canada Marine Act is 
amended by adding the following in 
alphabetical order:







``local port 
council''
« conseil 
portuaire 
local »


``local port council'' means a local port 
council established under section 64.4.  










2. The Act is amended by adding the 
following after section 64:










PART 1.1









LOCAL PORT COUNCILS









APPLICATION






Application of 
Part


64.1 Subject to this Part, the provisions of 
Part 1 of this Act apply to this Part, with such 
modifications as the circumstances require.










INCORPORATION






Letters patent


64.2 (1) For the purpose of carrying out the 
objectives of this Act, in particular those set 
out in paragraphs 4(e) and (g), the Minister 
may issue to any person or group of persons 
letters patent of incorporation that take effect 
on the date stated in them for a local port 
council without share capital for the purpose 
of operating a port in Canada not referred to in 
Part 1 of this Act, if the Minister is satisfied 
that, the port










(a) is not, but has the potential, as 
prescribed by regulation, to become and 
remain financially self-sustaining;









(b) is of strategic significance to a region or 
a local economy within Canada;









(c) is, or has the potential to become, linked 
to a major rail line or a major highway 
infrastructure; and









(d) has traffic that is important to the region 
or the local economy.









FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE






Financial 
assistance


64.3 (1) For the purposes of paragraph 1(a) 
and notwithstanding any other provision of 
this Act, the Minister may make available to 
a local port council, on the written request of 
the local port council, financial assistance 
from an existing fund or from a special fund 
that may be established by the Governor in 
Council, to assist the local port council in 
becoming, within the period specified by the 
Minister in consultation with the local port 
council, self-sustaining for the normal 
conduct of its operations.







Conditions


(2) The Minister may attach to the financial 
assistance made available to the local port 
council any reasonable conditions that the 
Minister considers necessary, including 
conditions respecting the period during which 
the local port authority is not required to be 
financially self-sustaining.







Transfer to a 
province


64.4 When, in the opinion of the Minister, 
the local port council attains the financial 
self-sufficiency required for the normal 
conduct of its operations, the Minister may 
enter into an agreement with the government 
of the province where the local port council is 
incorporated respecting the transfer, in whole 
or in part, of the port facilities or any other 
aspect of its operations, and whereby the 
provincial government shall assume, subject 
to the terms and conditions of the agreement, 
total and exclusive control of any aspect of the 
local council.










REGULATIONS






Regulations


64.5 (1) For the purposes of this Part, the 
Governor in Council may make regulations 
respecting










(a) any measure applicable to a local port 
council in the case of a transfer to a 
provincial government under section 64.4;









(b) any other measure that the Governor in 
Council considers necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of this Part, including the 
conditions under which a local port council 
canbecome self-sustaining under paragraph 
64.3(1)(a).









3. Subsection 65(3) of the Act is replaced 
by the following:







Deemed 
public ports


(3) With the exception of a port for which a 
port authority is incorporated under Part 1 or 
for which a local port council is incorporated 
under Part 1.1 , every port and facility to which 
the Canada Ports Corporation Act applied on 
the coming into force of this section is deemed 
to have been designated under subsection (1).










4. Subsection 104(1) of the Act is replaced 
by the following:







Regulations


104. (1) The Governor in Council may 
make regulations respecting the navigation 
and use of the navigable waters of a natural or 
man-made harbour, other than a harbour to 
which Part 1, Part 1.1 or Part  2 applies, 
including regulations for the safety of persons 
and ships in those waters.










5. Section 129 of the Act is replaced by the 
following:







Order to 
comply


129. (1) Where a person is guilty of an 
offence under Part 1 or Part 1.1  or the 
regulations made under paragraph 27(2)(a), a 
court in which proceedings in respect of the 
offence are taken may, in addition to any 
punishment it may impose, order the person to 
comply with those provisions for the 
contravention of which the person is 
convicted.







Civil remedy 
not affected


(2) No civil remedy for an act or omission 
is suspended or affected by reason that the act 
or omission is an offence under Part 1 or Part 
1.1  or the regulations made under paragraph 
27(1)(a).








