






49-50 ELIZABETH II









CHAPTER 15











An Act to amend the Excise Tax Act










[Assented to 14th June, 2001] 










Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate and House of Commons 
of Canada, enacts as follows:









SHORT TITLE






Short title


1. This Act may be cited as the Sales Tax 
and Excise Tax Amendments Act, 2001.







R.S., c. E-15


EXCISE TAX ACT









2. (1) Subsection 23(7) of the Excise Tax 
Act is amended by adding the word ``or'' at 
the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (b):










(c) the sale of a new motor vehicle designed 
for highway use, or a chassis therefor, to a 
person described in paragraph (h) of the 
definition ``manufacturer or producer'' in 
subsection 2(1) who is a manufacturer 
licensed for the purposes of this Part.






R.S., c. 15 (1st 
Supp.), 
s. 12(2)


(2) Paragraphs 23(7)(e) and (f) of the Act 
are repealed.










(3) Subsection (1) and subsection (2), to 
the extent that it repeals paragraph 23(7)(f) 
of the Act, are deemed to have come into 
force on January 1, 1994 and apply to sales 
made after 1993.










(4) Subsection (2), to the extent that it 
repeals paragraph 23(7)(e) of the Act, is 
deemed to have come into force on January 
1, 1994 and applies in respect of motor 
vehicles, or chassis therefor, imported after 
1993 by a person described in paragraph (g) 
of the definition ``manufacturer or 
producer'' in subsection 2(1) of the Act who 
is a manufacturer licensed for the purposes 
of Part III of the Act.










3. (1) The Act is amended by adding the 
following after section 87:







Waiver or 
cancellation 
of interest or 
penalty


88. The Minister may waive or cancel any 
amount otherwise payable to the Receiver 
General under this Act that is interest or a 
penalty calculated in the same manner as 
interest.










(2) Subsection (1) applies to amounts 
that, but for section 88 of the Act, as enacted 
by subsection (1), would become payable on 
or after the day on which this Act is assented 
to.







1993, c. 27, 
s. 44(1)


4. (1) The portion of subsection 179(2) of 
the Act after paragraph (c) is replaced by 
the following:










subsection (1) does not apply to a supply 
referred to in subparagraph (a)(i) and, except 
in the case of a supply of a service of shipping 
the property, any supply made by the 
registrant and referred to in that subparagraph 
is deemed to have been made outside Canada.







1993, c. 27, 
s. 44(1)


(2) The portion of subsection 179(3) of the 
Act after paragraph (c) is replaced by the 
following:










subsection (1) does not apply to a supply 
referred to in paragraph (a) and, except in the 
case of a supply of a service of shipping the 
property, any supply made by the registrant 
and referred to in that paragraph is deemed to 
have been made outside Canada.










(3) Section 179 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (6):







Use of railway 
rolling stock


(7) For the purpose of clause (3)(c)(ii)(C), 
if the only use of railway rolling stock after 
physical possession of it is transferred as 
described in that clause and before it is next 
exported is for the purpose of transporting 
tangible personal property or passengers in the 
course of that exportation and that exportation 
occurs within sixty days after the day on which 
the transfer takes place, that use of the rolling 
stock is deemed to take place entirely outside 
Canada.










(4) Subsections (1) and (2) apply to 
supplies for which all of the consideration 
becomes due after February 28, 2000 or is 
paid after that day without having become 
due.










(5) Subsection (3) applies to railway 
rolling stock the physical possession of 
which is transferred by a registrant 
pursuant to a supply by way of sale by the 
registrant for which all of the consideration 
becomes due after February 28, 2000 or is 
paid after that day without having become 
due.







1993, c. 27, 
s. 78(1)


5. (1) Subsection 213.2(1) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:







Import 
certificate


213.2 (1) The Minister may, on the request 
of a registrant who imports goods, issue to the 
registrant, subject to such conditions as the 
Minister may specify, a written authorization 
(in this section referred to as an ``import 
certificate'') for the purpose of applying, on 
and after the effective date specified in the 
authorization, section 8.1 of Schedule VII in 
respect of goods of a particular class imported 
by the registrant, in which event the Minister 
shall assign to the registrant a number to be 
disclosed when the goods are accounted for 
under section 32 of the Customs Act.










(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come 
into force on February 1, 1992.










6. (1) Section 215 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (2):







Value of 
goods 
re-imported 
after 
processing


(3) The value of goods that are being 
imported for the first time after having been 
processed (as defined in subsection 2(1) of the 
Value of Imported Goods (GST/HST) 
Regulations) outside Canada shall be 
determined for the purposes of this Division 
without regard to section 13 of those 
Regulations if










(a) the value of the goods would, but for this 
subsection, be determined for the purposes 
of this Division under that section; and









(b) they are the same goods, in their 
processed state, as other goods, or 
incorporate, as a result of their processing, 
other goods, that were last imported in 
circumstances in which no tax was payable 
under this Division because of section 8.1 or 
11 of Schedule VII.









(2) Subsection (1) applies to goods 
imported after February 1992 except that, 
with respect to goods imported before 
January 1, 2001, the reference in subsection 
215(3) of the Act, as enacted by subsection 
(1), to ``section 8.1 or 11'' shall be read as a 
reference to ``section 8.1''.










7. (1) Section 217 of the Act is amended by 
striking out the word ``or'' at the end of 
paragraph (b.3) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (c):










(d) a supply of property that is a zero-rated 
supply only because it is included in section 
1.1 of Part V of Schedule VI, if the recipient 
is not acquiring the property for 
consumption, use or supply exclusively in 
the course of commercial activities of the 
recipient and









(i) an authorization of the recipient to use 
the certificate referred to in that section 
is not in effect at the time the supply is 
made, or









(ii) the recipient does not export the 
property in the circumstances described 
in paragraphs 1(b) to (d) of that Part; or









(e) a supply of property that is a zero-rated 
supply only because it is included in section 
1.2 of Part V of Schedule VI, if the recipient 
is not acquiring the property for 
consumption, use or supply exclusively in 
the course of commercial activities of the 
recipient and









(i) an authorization of the recipient to use 
the certificate referred to in that section 
is not in effect at the time the supply is 
made, or









(ii) the recipient is not acquiring the 
property for use or supply as domestic 
inventory or as added property (as those 
expressions are defined in subsection 
273.1(1)).









(2) Subsection (1) applies to supplies 
made after 2000.










8. (1) Subsection 218.1(1) of the Act is 
amended by striking out the word ``and'' at 
the end of paragraph (b), by adding the 
word ``and'' at the end of paragraph (c) and 
by adding the following after paragraph 
(c):










(d) every person who is the recipient of a 
supply that is included in paragraph 217(d) 
or (e) and that is made in a particular 
participating province









(2) Section 218.1 of the Act is amended by 
adding the following after subsection (1):







Delivery in a 
province


(1.1) Section 3 of Part II of Schedule IX 
applies for the purpose of paragraph (1)(c).










(3) Subsection (1) applies to supplies 
made after 2000.










(4) Subsection (2) applies to supplies 
made after October 4, 2000.










9. (1) Subsection 221(2) of the Act is 
amended by striking out the word ``or'' at 
the end of paragraph (b) and by adding the 
following after paragraph (b):










(b.1) the supplier and the recipient have 
made an election under section 2 of Part I of 
Schedule V in respect of the supply; or






1993, c. 27, 
s. 85(1)


(2) Subsection 221(3.1) of the Act is 
repealed.










(3) Subsection (1) applies to supplies 
made after October 4, 2000.










(4) Subsection (2) applies to supplies 
made after 2000.







1993, c. 27, 
s. 86(1)


10. (1) The portion of subsection 221.1(2) 
of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced 
by the following:







Export 
certificate


(2) The Minister may, on the application of 
a person who is registered under Subdivision 
d, authorize the person to use, beginning on a 
particular day in a fiscal year of the person and 
subject to such conditions as the Minister may 
from time to time specify, a certificate (in this 
section referred to as an ``export certificate'') 
for the purpose of section 1.1 of Part V of 
Schedule VI, if it can reasonably be expected







1993, c. 27, 
s. 86(1)


(2) Subsection 221.1(4) of the Act is 
replaced by the following:







Notice of 
authorization


(4) If the Minister authorizes a registrant to 
use an export certificate, the Minister shall 
notify the registrant in writing of the 
authorization, its effective date and its expiry 
date and the number assigned by the Minister 
that identifies the registrant or the 
authorization and that must be disclosed by 
the registrant when providing the certificate 
for the purpose of section 1.1 of Part V of 
Schedule VI.










(3) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come 
into force on January 1, 2001.










(4) Subsection (2) applies to any 
authorization granted to a person after 
2000, whether on the first application of the 
person or on the renewal of an 
authorization previously granted.










11. (1) The Act is amended by adding the 
following after section 236.1:







Adjustment if 
invalid use of 
export 
certificate


236.2 (1) If a registrant has received a 
supply of property (other than a supply that is 
included in any provision of Schedule VI other 
than section 1.1 of Part V of that Schedule) 
from a supplier to whom the registrant has 
provided an export certificate (within the 
meaning of section 221.1) for the purpose of 
that supply and an authorization of the 
registrant to use the certificate was not in 
effect at the time the supply was made or the 
registrant does not export the property in the 
circumstances described in paragraphs 1(b) to 
(d) of that Part, the registrant shall, in 
determining the net tax for the reporting 
period of the registrant that includes the 
earliest day on which tax in respect of the 
supply became payable or would have become 
payable if the supply were not a zero-rated 
supply, add an amount equal to interest, at the 
rate prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 
280(1)(b) plus 4% per year compounded daily, 
on the total amount of tax in respect of the 
supply that was payable or would have been 
payable if the supply were not a zero-rated 
supply, computed for the period beginning on 
that earliest day and ending on the day on or 
before which the return under section 238 for 
that reporting period is required to be filed.







Adjustment if 
deemed 
revocation of 
export 
certificate


(2) If a registrant's authorization to use an 
export certificate (within the meaning of 
section 221.1) is deemed to have been revoked 
under subsection 221.1(6) effective 
immediately after the last day of a fiscal year 
of the registrant, the registrant shall, in 
determining the net tax for the first reporting 
period of the registrant following that year, 
add the amount determined by the formula










A x B/12










where










A	is the total of










(a) the product obtained when the rate set 
out in subsection 165(1) is multiplied by 
the total of all amounts each of which is 
consideration paid or payable by the 
registrant for a supply made in a 
non-participating province of an item of 
inventory acquired by the registrant in 
the year that is a zero-rated supply only 
because it is included in section 1.1 of 
Part V of Schedule VI, other than a 
supply in respect of which the registrant 
is required under subsection (1) to add an 
amount in determining net tax for any 
reporting period, and









(b) the product obtained when the total of 
the rates set out in subsections 165(1) and 
(2) is multiplied by the total of all 
amounts each of which is consideration 
paid or payable by the registrant for a 
supply made in a participating province 
of an item of inventory acquired by the 
registrant in the year that is a zero-rated 
supply only because it is included in 
section 1.1 of Part V of Schedule VI, 
other than a supply in respect of which 
the registrant is required under 
subsection (1) to add an amount in 
determining net tax for any reporting 
period, and









B	is the total of 4% and the rate of interest 
prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 
280(1)(b) (expressed as a percentage per 
year) that is in effect on the last day of that 
first reporting period following the year.







Adjustment if 
invalid use of 
export 
distribution 
centre 
certificate


236.3 (1) If a registrant has received a 
supply of property (other than a supply that is 
included in any provision of Schedule VI other 
than section 1.2 of Part V of that Schedule) 
from a supplier to whom the registrant has 
provided an export distribution centre 
certificate (within the meaning of section 
273.1) for the purpose of that supply and an 
authorization of the registrant to use the 
certificate was not in effect at the time the 
supply was made or the property was not 
acquired by the registrant for use or supply as 
domestic inventory or as added property (as 
those expressions are defined in subsection 
273.1(1)) in the course of commercial 
activities of the registrant, the registrant shall, 
in determining the net tax for the reporting 
period of the registrant that includes the 
earliest day on which tax in respect of the 
supply became payable or would have become 
payable if the supply were not a zero-rated 
supply, add an amount equal to interest, at the 
rate prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 
280(1)(b) plus 4% per year compounded daily, 
on the total amount of tax in respect of the 
supply that was payable or that would have 
been payable in respect of the supply if the 
supply were not a zero-rated supply, computed 
for the period beginning on that earliest day 
and ending on the day on or before which the 
return under section 238 for that reporting 
period is required to be filed.







Adjustment if 
export 
distribution 
centre 
conditions not 
met


(2) If an authorization granted to a 
registrant under subsection 273.1(7) is in 
effect at any time in a fiscal year of the 
registrant and the export revenue percentage 
of the registrant (as defined in subsection 
273.1(1)) for that year is less than 90% or the 
circumstances described in paragraph 
273.1(11)(a) or (b) exist with respect to the 
year, the registrant shall, in determining the 
net tax for the first reporting period of the 
registrant following the year, add the amount 
determined by the formula










A x B/12










where










A	is the total of










(a) the product obtained when the rate set 
out in subsection 165(1) is multiplied by 
the total of all amounts each of which is 
consideration paid or payable by the 
registrant for a supply made in a 
non-participating province of property 
acquired by the registrant in the year that 
is a zero-rated supply only because it is 
included in section 1.2 of Part V of 
Schedule VI, other than a supply in 
respect of which the registrant is required 
under subsection (1) to add an amount in 
determining net tax for any reporting 
period,









(b) the product obtained when the total of 
the rates set out in subsections 165(1) and 
(2) is multiplied by the total of all 
amounts each of which is consideration 
paid or payable by the registrant for a 
supply made in a participating province 
of property acquired by the registrant in 
the year that is a zero-rated supply only 
because it is included in section 1.2 of 
Part V of Schedule VI, other than a 
supply in respect of which the registrant 
is required under subsection (1) to add an 
amount in determining net tax for any 
reporting period, and









(c) the product obtained when the rate set 
out in subsection 165(1) is multiplied by 
the total of all amounts each of which is 
the value that is or would be, but for 
subsection 215(2), deemed under 
subsection 215(1) to be the value, for the 
purposes of Division III, of a good that 
was imported by the registrant in the year 
and in respect of which, by reason only of 
section 11 of Schedule VII, tax under that 
Division did not apply, and









B	is the total of 4% and the rate of interest 
prescribed for the purposes of paragraph 
280(1)(b) (expressed as a percentage per 
year) that is in effect on the last day of that 
first reporting period following the year.










(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come 
into force on January 1, 2001 and applies to 
supplies made after 2000.







1990, c. 45, 
s. 12(1)


12. (1) The definition ``single unit 
residential complex'' in subsection 254(1) of 
the Act is replaced by the following:







``single unit 
residential 
complex''
« immeuble 
d'habitation à 
logement 
unique »


``single unit residential complex'' includes










(a) a multiple unit residential complex 
that does not contain more than two 
residential units, and









(b) any other multiple unit residential 
complex if it is described by paragraph 
(c) of the definition ``residential 
complex'' in subsection 123(1) and 
contains one or more residential units 
that are for supply as rooms in a hotel, 
motel, inn, boarding house, lodging 
house or similar premises and that would 
be excluded from being part of the 
residential complex if the complex were 
a residential complex not described by 
that paragraph.









(2) Subsection (1) is deemed to have come 
into force on June 1, 1997 and applies for 
the purpose of determining any rebate of a 
person under section 254 of the Act in 
respect of a residential complex ownership 
of which is transferred to the person after 
May 1997.








