





2nd Session, 35th Parliament,
45 Elizabeth II, 1996-97










The House of Commons of Canada










BILL C-341









An Act to establish the terms and conditions 
that must apply to a referendum relating 
to the separation of Quebec from Canada 
before it may be recognized as a proper 
expression of the will of the people of 
Quebec







Preamble


 Whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that a referendum or plebiscite on 
the independence of Quebec, if the question is 
ambiguous or unclear, would be contrary to 
the interests of Canadians in Quebec and 
elsewhere;










 And whereas the Parliament of Canada 
recognizes that any attempt on the part of the 
government of Quebec to act unilaterally on 
the basis of such a referendum or plebiscite 
would be an illegal and unilateral attempt to 
amend the Constitution of Canada and a threat 
to the peace, order and good government of 
Canada;










Now, therefore, Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate and House of 
Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:










 






Short title


1. This Act may be cited as the Quebec 
Contingency Act (referendum conditions).







Prohibited 
questions


2. The Government of Canada shall not 
recognize any referendum or plebiscite 
carried out under the authority of the 
government or legislature of Quebec on the 
question of the separation of Quebec from 
Canada if the question is ambiguous or 
unclear or implies that the government or 
legislature of Quebec would or might be 
empowered by an affirmative vote in the 
referendum or plebiscite to unilaterally amend 
the Constitution of Canada relative to the 
position of Quebec in Canada.







Determina-
tion of 
violation


3. (1) For the purposes of section 2, a 
question is deemed to be ambiguous or 
unclear or imply that the government or 
legislature of Quebec would or might be 
empowered by an affirmative vote in the 
referendum or plebiscite to unilaterally amend 
any part of the Constitution of Canada relative 
to the position of Quebec in Canada if the 
Governor in Council issues an order to that 
effect.







Reference to 
House of 
Commons


(2) The Governor in Council may seek the 
opinion of the House of Commons prior to 
issuing an order pursuant to subsection (1) by 
authorizing a Minister of the Crown to move 
a motion in the House that proposes that the 
question to be put in the referendum does or 
does not infringe one or both of the conditions 
mentioned in section 2.







Time for 
debate


(3) The House may allow such time as it 
may determine on a motion of the Minister of 
the Crown for the debate on the motion, but 
the Speaker may extend the time so set if it 
appears to the Speaker that further time is 
advisable.







Consequences 
of declaration


4. If the Governor in Council issues an order 
under subsection 3(1),










(a) the Minister of Foreign Affairs shall 
advise the representative in Canada of 
every State with which Canada has 
diplomatic relations that Canada does not 
recognize the referendum or plebiscite as 
valid;









(b) the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs shall inform the Government of 
Quebec that Canada does not recognize the 
referendum or plebiscite as valid; and









(c) the Governor in Council may prohibit 
the participation of any minister of the 
Crown in the public debate on the 
referendum or plebiscite, and the 
expenditure of any public funds of Canada 
with respect to the referendum or plebiscite, 
if it is of the opinion that the participation 
or expenditure would give the impression 
that the Government of Canada considers 
that the referendum or plebiscite would be 
a legitimate expression of the will of the 
people of Quebec.






Parallel 
referendum


5. (1) If the Governor in Council issues an 
order under subsection 3(1), the Governor in 
Council shall order the Chief Electoral Officer 
to issue a writ of referendum for a referendum 
to be held, in Quebec, under the provisions of 
the Referendum Act, on the same day as the 
referendum or plebiscite is held by the 
government of Quebec.







Questions


(2) The ballot at the referendum held under 
subsection (1) shall bear the following two 
questions:










(a) should Quebec separate from Canada 
and become an independent country with 
no special legal ties to Canada - YES or 
NO?









(b) if Quebec separates from Canada, 
should my community separate from 
Quebec and remain a part of 
Canada - YES or NO?






Affirmative 
vote in valid 
referendum


6. Subject to section 7, if a majority of the 
ballots cast in a referendum or plebiscite










(a) held by the government of Quebec on 
the question of Quebec separation that has 
not been the subject of an order under 
subsection 3(1), or









(b) held by the Government of Canada 
under section 5









are cast in the affirmative, the Government is 
authorized to enter into discussions with the 
government of Quebec to conclude an 
agreement on the terms on which Quebec 
might separate from Canada.







Limitations


7. In any discussions under section 6, the 
Government of Canada must










(a) consult with the provinces to seek the 
consent of each province to the terms;









(b) obtain the consent of any province to 
any matter that requires an amendment to 
the Constitution of Canada to which the 
province must consent;









(c) require the inclusion of a provision that 
the agreement will not become effective 
until it is approved by a majority of voters 
who reside outside Quebec, decided by a 
vote in a referendum under the Referendum 
Act; and









(d) permit the inclusion of a provision 
allowing for the government of Quebec to 
seek the approval of voters who reside in 
Quebec, decided by vote in a referendum or 
plebiscite under Quebec law.






Unilateral 
declaration of 
independence


8. A unilateral declaration of independence 
by the government of Quebec or the 
legislature of Quebec, or the refusal of either 
to submit to any Canadian law that applies in 
Quebec, is unlawful and of no force and effect 
with respect to the Constitution of Canada and 
the general laws of Canada and does not affect










(a) the jurisdiction of Parliament to pass 
laws that have effect in Quebec;









(b) the ability of the Government of Canada 
to govern Quebec as a province of Canada;









(c) the jurisdiction of the courts to apply the 
law of Canada in Quebec; or









(d) the continuance of Quebec as a part of 
Canada under Canadian law.






Coming into 
force


9. This Act comes into force on a day to be 
fixed by order of the Governor in Council.








